+++
title = "Generality"
+++
\[[MTTW16](https://twitter.com/blog_supplement/status/739516248522915840)\]

"The modern H religion or for that matter even the Indian phase of the vaidika form of the religion show flavors that might've originated from proto-Indian traditions. For.eg. use of coconut with mango leaves, & the transfer of old IE tree veneration to subcontinental figs might be substral influence. Yet, the core structure of the Hindu religion in its vedic & later manifestations, caste or tribal/avarNa is very recognizably IE than anything else.This's true of other branches of IE settling elsewhere too. .. My current conclusion is that the IE religion was imminently adaptable to any local situation far from any home geography or base racial group because of its mobile steppe origins: A place where a city-like locus means little compared to the west Asian city based cults & categories in the world view & ritual've a certain degree of generality that anyone in the heathen world can identify with. Not to forget earliest potential IE people as we know them were genetically composite." 

## Historical context
"It is for this system our Indo-Aryan ancestors had the words like ṛta and dharma. Even in far off Bali in the East, even after many, many genetic admixtures, this system, which had developed in steppe-land, held fast in those who were soaked in it. But today practitioners of most branches of this ancient system of thought have ceased to be such – they only have the languages not the system. The Iranians have been reduced to a tribe and are on route to extinction – we are to only ones who remain and some among us still understand its essence in form not far from what it was on bronze age steppes despite all its evolution over the millennia. Beyond religion in the narrow sense, in its orthodox and heterodox forms, this system is at the foundation of everything else notable across the branches of the Indo-European world like science, technology, and arts." (MT[20151212](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/12/12/a-note-on-the-early-expansions-of-the-indo-europeans/))
