+++
title = "33 Tarka and Dharmaśāstra"

+++

CHAPTER XXXIII 

Tarka and Dharmaśāstra 

The Yāñavalkyasmrti (I. 3) mentions Nyāya (logic )2409 ag one of the fourteen vidyās and as one of the means of knowing what Dharma is. Nyāya is rendered as 'tarkavidyā' by the Mitākṣarā on Yāj. and the Mit. states that the fourteon vidyās are the hetu (moans) of ( knowing) dharma, 

Both the Nyāyasūtra and the Vaiśeṣikasūtra of Kanāda postulate that 'nihśreyasa' follows from the correct knowledge of the categories of the two darśanas, 2410 

One of the earliest occurrences of the word tarka is in the Kathopaniṣad 2421 where it is declared "This knowledge about the Self) cannot be obtained by (mere) ratiocination' and the previous verse states that the Self is subtler than the subtlest and not capable of being understood by mere inference or reasoning. The word 'mantavyaḥ' in the passage 2412 • Ātmā vā are drastavyaḥ śrotavyo mantavyo' (in Bṭ. Up. II, 4. 5 and IV.5.6) is held by the objector (in bhāsya on V. S. I. 1. 2) and also by Saṅkarācārya as referring to tarka on V.S. II. 1.4. Tarka is accepted as an anga of Yoga in the Maitrāyaṇi Up. (vide note 2327 above), which further quotes a passage stating that by the control of speech, mind and prāṇa one apprehends brahman 

2409. Some works read the verse as 'Purāṇa-tarka-mināmsa'; vida pote 1337 for the verse, 

2410. sprat ur but YTEUTA: 1 valsgaga:TAAR: \# : 1 prayer कर्मसामान्यविशेषसमवायानां पदार्थानां साधर्म्यवैधाग्या तत्वज्ञानं निःश्रेयसदेतः । a I. 1. 2 and 4; FRIOTAT FETT Tra-em-ferraraya faofa. वादज्ञानवितण्डाहेत्वाभासच्छलजातिनिग्रहस्थानानां तत्वज्ञानाशिःश्रेयसाधिगमः । भ्यायसूत्र 1. 1. 1. The word faith occurs in 'ator (a long sūtra) in 97. and in elfraegnage II, 14 and III. 2. 

2411. Aun ar to afacratat merogata ghianto orig. II. 9 4. by y ard in 1904 on . \#. II, 1. 6. The previous verse cods with the words 'groftara AQIYATOTT.: rgāy is an irregular form for watci (sirgt अनीय) or lor अपनेय (from नी with अप). 

2412. strangera ! : 977 SET of methaaragtagraa:ntep forte, men enor queria i Aal. 34. VI, 29.Ancient references to 'tarka' 

1469 

with the help of tarka. 2413 The Gautamadharmasūtra 2414 remarks 'tarka is the means for securing justice ( among contending parties)'. One of the replies given by Yudhisthira to the Yakṣa guarding a lake is 'ratiocination is unstable (leads to no certain conclusions), the Vedic texts differ (among themselves), there is no single sage whose opinion is held authoritative (by people or other Bages); the essence of Dharma is placed in a care (i. e. is enveloped in darkness and cannot be seen clearly), that is the path (to be followed) by which the majority of people 2415 proceed'. This appears to make man in the mass the ultimate tribunal on all questions of value. In its peroration at the end, the Manusmrti observes 'one who desires to secure the pure Dharma must know well the three viz. direct perception (or experience), inference, and śāstra based on various traditions ; none but that man who considers the sayings of sages (i. e. the Veda), the instruction on Dharma (contained in the Smrtis) with the help of reasoning that does not ( directly) conflict with Veda and sāstras knows what Dharma is ', 2416 This is the position of most orthodox Sanskrit writers about Tarka. Their reasoning appears to have been this. If one were to rely on mere reason, the result would be uncertainty and anarchy. Every theorist states that his system is based on reason; but the angwers arrived at on the basis of reason as to questions of vital importance to ordinary men are bewilderingly different. Thinkers brought up in different environments and of different experiences have different logics and propound even different moral laws. Whom should an ordinary man follow? The Vedas and Smṛtis 

2413. अतिरपि 'श्रोतग्यो मन्तव्यः' इति श्रवणव्यतिरेकेण मनन विदधती तर्कमप्य प्रादर्तव्यं दर्शयति (this is पूर्वपक्ष in भाष्य on वे.. II. 1.4); to this the भाप replies 'पदपि श्रवणण्यतिरेकेण मननं विदधच्छब्द एवं तर्कमप्यावर्वन्यं दर्शवतीयुचर। मानेन मिषण शुष्कतर्कस्यात्रात्मलाभः सम्भवति। शुस्यनुगृहीत एव सत्र सोऽवभवावणा Hirgans. The following sentence in the area citos three examples of intero aces not opposed to śruti. 

3414, para sayura:1 arayan yerUTI TATTI A . II. 23-24. 

2413. hisapas: 1 ... qu: 1 Fargs 313, 117 (Chitrashala ed, whole verse q. 10 8. 2072 ). Some mss read det gratis. The sūtra anfaldarar acgrege AAA atcerie alate (. . II. 1.11 ) seems to echo the words of $144. Vide H, of Dh. vol. III. p. 860 A, 1667, where hulkar on pas. II, 1 refers to 'AQT ... CPOT: ' as a fer". 

2416, TUNATATA STEFTATE IT aratani ya g आर्ष धर्मोपदेशं च वेदशास्त्राविरोधिना । यस्तणासन्धचे सधर्म वेद मेवर मनुxn. 105, 106, relied upop by T aniq micron 2. . II. 1, 11. 

1470 

History of Dharmaśāstra (Sec. VIII, Ch. XXXII 

embody the principles of conduct in all spheres of life arrived at by eminent and solfloas sages during the course of thousands of years i, e, they embody the experiences and the reasonings of numerous wise men. Therefore, if a modern man says that reason leads him to hold opinions opposed to the Veda, most people are not prepared to accept a single man's opinion pitted against the views of numerous ancient sages. This point deed not be elaborated further. On many important questions viz. whether there is God or a Supreme Intelligence guiding the universe, or whether there is an individual self, or what the future of a man when he dies is, the wisest among mop have given widely differing answers.2117 On such questions final answers acceptable to all or most people cannot be given by reason alone. Though the orthodox position is as stated above, it has been shown above (e. g. on pp. 1267-1269) how Vedic practices have boon discarded by the weight of popular opinion from time to time. It is laid down by Smrti writers themselves that blindly following the words of Sastra would lead to loss of Dharma and that in case of conflict between two Smṛtis reasoning should be resorted to and popular opinions and practices should be con- , sidered. Vide H. of Dh. vol III, pp. 866-868 for this. The Mahabharata enjoins 2418 'one should not try to solve incompre hensible matters by ratiocination.' In the dialogue between the famished sage Viśvāmitra (who desired to eat the tail of a dog) and a cāndāla the great Epic winds up by saying therefore & learned man whose soul is pure should act after relying on his intelligence in the matter of deciding what Dharma and adharma are' 2419 It should not be supposed that Saṅkarācārya and other great Indian writers wanted to throw reasoning over. board altogether. What they emphasized was that more reason ing of one or more men should not as a rule be followed if the 

2417. Pascal quoted in This I believe' edited by E. P. Morgan (London, 1953) OB p. 60 says 'The heart bas its reasons which reason does not understand.' 

2418. अचिन्त्याः खल ये भावा न तांस्तर्केण योजयेत् । पतिभ्यः परं यच्च तदचिन्त्यस्य Burgo s 5.12, q. by prar as fala op. II. 1.6. First half ooly q. by trand oo a. . 11. 1. 6. This also occors io EFT 113, 6, 9 ( ie 3, 12), the first bali in rete II. 13. 7-8. og reads were ora and some read साधयेत् for योजयेत् प्रकृति would mean material cause. The मत्स्य (Anaa. ed.) reads stran: ... aley atau turta, thus roversing the position adopted by others, 

2419. तस्मात्कौन्तेय विदुषा धर्माधर्मविनिश्चये। बुद्धिमास्थाय लोकस्मियतिसम्प POTATO s ave 141. 102 * çr, ed. chap. 439. 94, 

T'arka. Veda and Simplis 

conclusions arrived at by reasoning are in direct conflict with Vedic and smrti texts. Saṅkarācārya clearly states his position on 7. 8. II, 1, 1. and 11.2420 Beliefs (such as those of Jains and Buddhists) were held to be heterodox, because they did not acknowledge the authority of the Veda and the sacred tradition, though they often observad Hindu practices and married with Hindus; but within this limit there was room enough for an enormous and bewildering variety of convictions, rites and practices that olaimed to be orthodox. This may be illustrated by the attitude of some Upaniṣads. For example, the Mundaka Up. (I.1.4-5) speaks of two vidyās, parā and aparā, includes under aparā the four Vedas and the six angas and parā (highest) vidyā is that by which the imperishable brahman is attained. In the Chan. Up. (VII. 1.1-5) when Nārada approached Sanat kumāra for instruction, the former recounted what he had already learnt viz. the four Vedas, Itihasapurāṇa and other lores; then Sanatkumāra tells him that all that he has studied is mere name and then explains what is better than all those. Mundaka (I. 2.7 ) condemns yajfias as leaky vessels. It is extremely surprising that the Chān. Up. in I. 12. 2-5 compares the procedure of the five priests and the sacrificer touching each other and creeping from the sadas towards the cātvala where the Bahiṣpavamāna chant is to be sung with a procession of dogs, each dog holding the tail of the preceding dog in his mouth. Vide for the creeping of priests noiselessly and silently Tāndya Brāhmaṇa VI, 7, 9-12 and Ap. Srauta-sūtra XII, 17.1-4 and H. of Dh, vol. II. pp. 1166 and 1169. Though this is so, the Upa piṣads are called Vedanta, are looked upon as orthodox and as the highest end of the Vedic religion and literature. Most anoient Upaniṣads, however, quote Vedic Samhita taxts as autho rities. For example, Bṭ. Up. 1. 4. 10 and Ait. Up. II. 5 quote Rg. IV. 26. 1 and IV. 27.1 respectively; Bṛ, Up. I. 5. 16-17 quote Rg. I. 116, 12 and I. 117. 22 and Bṭ. Up. L. 5. 19 cites Rg. VI. 47. 18; Katha IV. 9 is the same as Atharvaveda X 8. 16, Prasna I 11 is quoted from Rg. I. 164. 1%. The Mundaka III. %. 10 

2420. पेवस्य हि निरपेक्ष स्वार्थे प्रामाण्यं खेरिव रूपविषये। पुरुषवचसां तुमूलान्त पेक्ष वक्तुमतिव्यवदितं चेति विपकर्षः। तस्मादिविरुद्ध विषये सत्यनषकाशवोपासको न aq: i 1716 OD . . II.1.1; aghairarat auteur Teet Ramadera: I चित्तार्किकेणेवमेव सम्यग्ज्ञानमिति प्रतिपादितं तदपरेण व्युत्थाप्यते तेनापि प्रतिष्ठापितं ततोऽपरेण म्युल्याप्यते इति प्रसिद्ध लोके । कथमेकरूपानवस्थितविषयं नर्कमभवं सम्यग्ज्ञानं भवेत्। नच प्रधानवादी तर्कविवारचम इति सर्वस्तार्किकः परिगृहीतो येन नदीपं मतं सम्पशाममिति spaudato Sira on a. II, 1.11. 

1472 

History of Dharmafāstra Stoc. VIII, Оb. XXXIII 

provides that brahmavidya is to be expounded to brotriyas (those who have studied the Veda). Horain tha Upaniṣads rely upon the principle of adbikārabhoda 

One of the oldest philosophical problems is Authority and Reason or to put it in different words, Faith and Reason and there has been throughout the ages a constant struggle between these two. Most men want to rely on some authority, on some one deered higher than themselves. For vast numbers of people this authority or the something greater than themselves is Reve lation and God. They have neither the leisure nor the inclina tion nor the intellectual ability to think for themselves rationally on such abstruse questions as the existence of God or an in dividual self, free will and determinism, the general principles of conduct, the final destiny of men after physical death &o. In sociological matters human judgement is often warped by prevailing dogmas and prejudices; on questions which are deemed to be religious (and in India the field of matters deemed to be religious has always been very extensive) a frank discus. sion is almost impossible without creating anger and rancour. Several ethical questions such as divorce and birth control often assume the position of religious dogmas and when openly discussed create great heat. In several so-called democracies of the present day rational discussion comes last and vital questions are determined by party loyalties or by personality culte or by lust for power and self-aggrandisement. It should not be supposed that ancient and medieval India had no ration alists por atheists. As a matter of fact there were several rationalists. Vide the prosent author's note 875 pp. 358-359 in H. of Dh. Vol. I, Vol. III, pp. 46-47 note 57 on Lokayatas and their views, 2421 and pp. 974–975 note 1596 above for rationalistio criticism of sacrifices, śrāddhas &o. Many ration alists hold that there is no proof of the existence of God, they deny an individual soul, they deny immortality and the existence of any intelligence in the universe higher than man'a, deny that there is any design or purpose in the Universe and they believe that in all religions there is some truth mixed with a great deal of error. The case of the rationalist is that 

2421. For Lokāyata or Laukāyatika, vide the work Tattvopaplava simha of Jayarāsibbaṭta (GOS). The word Lokāyata occord in the gana Uktbādi mentioned in Papioi 'Kratūktbādiautrādtat-thak IV. 2. 60. Vide Dr. Dakshinaranjan Shastri's 'Short History of lodian Materialiom' (Calcutta, 2nd ed. of 1957) and pp. 1205-6 note 1956 abova. 

Rationalists' arguments 

1473 

he should not be called upon to prove that there is no God (which is a negative proposition), that it is for theists to prove that God exists (which is a positive proposition) and that he is omnipotent and omniscient. They say that to attribute anger, love, pity to God is to implicitly negative God's omnipotence. The problem of evil in the world is, according to rationalists, a great stumbling blook in accepting God as good, kind, all knowing and all-powerful. The rationalist might agree with the theist that man as an individual depends on something greater than himself that is able to give directions and to punish him for the disobedience of directions. For the rationa list it is some kind of community or society in which men live and have their being that is greater than themselves. This would be substituting the worship of the human community or of collective human power for the worship of God. What human community is to be in the place of God? Is it to be the whole buman race (now having over two thousand million human beings ) or some big or small groups out of these? There are now two well-defined blocks between whom there is a conflict of ideological ends, viz, the communist block represented by the U. 8. S. R. and China and the capitalistic block represented by U. S. A., England and several other countries of Europe, and & third unorganized block of countries professing to have no alignment with anyone of the two blooka, 

In these days Communism is really a form of worship i. e. worship of man or men in place of the worship of God. It may be conceded that probably the masses of the Russian people are far better off in the matter of physical needs than they were in the regime of the Tsars. The magnos seem to have devotion to Communism. But that devotion is more apparent than real, based on the hope of quiok gains or the fear of prompt punishment and is the product of rigid State control of education and the environment. The communists have an attractive slogan in the words Workors of the world I unite, you have nothing to lose but your chains.' There are also the catchwords 'Dictatorship of the proletariat.'. But this ends in fact in a dictatorship of the Communist Party over the proletariat. In return for physioal well-being the common people have had to bargain away several freedoms, freedom to think for themselves, freedom of expression, freedom of intercourse with foreigners, freedom to choose their ocoupation &o. The commu nista make no secret that they want to bring the whole world under Communism. Therefore, they pose that they are the 

B, D. 185 . .. 

1474 

History of Dharmasastra [ Seo. VIII, Ch. XXXIII 

saviours of common men and women throughout the world and they cannot be charged with aggression since they mean to liberate people from the bonds of capitalism or colonialism &o. Their creed is one of fanaticism, of intolerance or hatred of others. The only experiment of a godless society on a large scale was made by the Soviet, but it does not appear to outsiders to have been a happy or successful one. The universal exhibi tion of portraits of great Soviet leaders ( some of whom were declared by successor leaders to be no better than murderera ) 2422 proclaims the necessity of worship even in a godless society. Dictators have nationalized not only all the means of the produca tion of wealth but also all the labour in the country. They have established themselves in the place of God and desire to have total control over the bodies and tbe minds of all their subjects. The faith of the communists is that their country is a heaven on earth and one must accept their word for that without wanting to see for one self the real state of things. The Communists have their own special versions of history, economios and science. These one must not question. 

The followers of Judaism, Christianity and Islam (all believing in one God and one Book ) did not hesitate for centuries to inculcate their doctrines and practices by terrible persecutions and bloody wars. This spirit is very shocking to people brought up in Hinduism or Buddhism. If Rationalists substitute blocks of humanity or the leaders of such blocks for worship and authority, humanity itself would soon be wiped out. Conceding for argument that the existence of an omnipotent and omniscient Power cannot be proved to the satisfaction of the so-called rationalists, the present writer feels that it is for the good of most societies consisting of millions of common men and women that they believe in God and the individual soul. Most men are influenced to keep to the path of virtue and right by the fear of God, by the prickings of conscience (which is the inner light implanted in man by God), by the fear of public opinion, and by fear of punishment at the hands of the rulers of the State (vide 

coinbahar February pages. The 

2422. Tbose interested in this pbase of Communism should read 

• Krushchev and Stalin's Ghost' by Bertram De Wolfo (1957); PP. 88-252 contaio on even pages Krushchev's secret report to 20th Congress on the Digbt of February 24, 25 jan 1956, translated into English and odd pages contain notes and commentaries by the author. Oo p. 91 gote it is stated that Stalia placed the number of Kulaks disposed of at one crore, Vido * Assigpment ia Utopia' by E. Lyon (1937) for the borros ia Russia before 1934, and 'Communist China to-day' by S, Chandrasekhara, Asia Publiablag House, Bombay, 1961 for the present state of morala in China. 

Rationalists' arguments discussed 

1475 

Santiparva quoted in H. of Dh, vol II, p. 389 note 619). Those who reject the first of these would have to reject the 2nd also and would have to fall back upon hedonism (the greatest pleasure for themselves) or the idea of greatest good of the greatest number or progress towards some ideal state of society painted by imagination. The pursuit of purely secular or worldly happi. ness is incompatible with the precepts and ideals of Hinduism and all higher religions, Rationalism accepts the postulates which science finds convenient and useful. Though these postulates work well up to certain limits, it must be said that those limits are very narrow. Science aims at establishing general rules or laws. From those laws we know only the behaviour of nature and how man can utilize natural forces for realizing human aims; but science does not tell us what those aims should be, it is amoral and not concerned with morals or spirituality. Rationalism appears to smother many experiences of the human mind which are beyond the present machinery of science. When the scientific method is adopted in social studies, there is little to show that it leads to increased wisdom about the values that should be pursued. Rationalism insists that all our beliefs ought ultimately to be based on tangible and definite grounds and that modern scientific method is the only reliable method for acquiring knowledge of all kinds. But there are sub-conscious and non-rational impulses, beliefs and intuitions in men that are held by men to be truer or of a higher order than what is on the rationalistic level (vide W. James' Varieties of religious experience' p. 74, ed. of 1920). It should be the endeavour of leaders of thought in each generation to find out what is essential and vital in tradition (without believing in the infallibility of all traditions) and to present reasoned dogmas which, while retaining the essential elements of tradition, will meet the demands of modern thought and conditions and obvironment. It is not necessary to say here more about modern rationalism. For over two thousand years our ancient writers and smptis like those of Manu (XII. 105-106 which are relied upon by Kumārila himself as shown on p. 1261 above) have allowed to tarka a place in the matter of finding out what Dharma is and have been most tolerant of differing views open on fundamental matters as shown above and brought about great changes even in religious rituala, philosophical views, social customs and practices without perpetrating atrocities and indulging in wholesale persooutions. A man may be a monothojat, or a polytheist or 

1476 

History of Dharmatīsira 1 Sec. VIII, Ch. XXXII 

an image-worshipper, an agnostci, or atheist or an idealist philo. sopher holding 'nirguṇa brahma' as the only reality, yet he may nevertheless be held to be a full Hindu, if he conforms to the general attitude towards Veda and social usages. A more radical tolerance than what our people showed throughout the ages is almost unthinkable. Western writers while admitting great tolerance in religious views and practices harp often on the requirements about observing caste rules in matters of food, marriage etc. But caste is more a social institution than & religious one and therefore just as in Western countries there were rules of etiquette and observance ( such as the number 13 and the regulations against working on Sabbath and against theatre going, card playing and physical exercise except walk. ing) that had to be observed meticulously, in India caste ruleg had to be observed. Besides, even when caste rules were brokon the offender had in a meeting of the caste people to admit his mistake, to pay a fine to the caste or village temple and then was restored to all privileges of the casto. As the Christian churches were extremely intolerant of the slightest departuro from religious views held at particular times, there arose in Europe the emphasis on rationalism and freedom to hold opinions. Government could effectively mould the opinions of its subjects by controlling education, by censorship of books and by inflicting severe penalties on those who expressed opinions opposed to those espoused by them. The Roman Church prepared an Index of forbidden books and an Index expurgatorius (a list of passages to be expunged from books that were otherwise permitted). The first Index Librorum Prohibitorius in its latest edition (before 1949) contains 5000 titles. Lecky in his 'History of the rise and influence of ration alism in Europe' 2423 points out to the extirpation of Christianity from Japan, of Protestantism from Spain, of the Huguenots from France, of most Catholics from England. The Jesuits acted on the 2424 principle that the end justifies the means. 

2423. Vide Lecky's work, vol. II p. 5 for these instances (ed. of 1890). Tbe Toleration Act' (1689) in Englaad expressly excluded Catholics and Unitariaos from the benefits of the Act, In 1401 the English Parliament passed the Statute for the burning of beretics which was not repealed until the Stuarts came back. Vide • Conscience and Liberty' by Robert S. W. Pollard (1940) pages 46-48, for barsh laws is force in England a little over ove buodred years ago against aon-Conformista and Roman Catholics. 

2424. Vide 'Rationalism in Theory and Practice' by Archibald Roberto son (pub. by Watts & Co., 1954 ) p. 57 for the Jesuits. Vide p. 59 of the 

(Continued on next pago) 

• 

Jesuits' methods 

1477 

Their end was the 'greater glory of God', which meant to them the conversion of peoples and kingdoms to Roman Catholicism. Their means included incitements to 89gagsination and to war, It has been mentioned above (p: 483) how Galileo was por secuted for espousing the Copernican theory in astronomy. Not much difference is made to religion whether the Sun revolves round the earth or the earth round the sun. In this connection it may be pointed out that Aryabhata (born in 476 A, D.) appears to have held the view that the stars did not revolve round the earth, but the latter revolved round itself and gave the illustration of a man sitting in a moving boat feeling that it is the stationary objects on the banks that rush past in the opposite direction, 2425 The Pancasiddhāntikā (13. 6) of Varāhamihira refers to this view and rejects it, not on the ground that it is opposed to the Veda, but on the ground that, if that view were correct, hawks and other birds flying high up in the sky would not be able to come baok to their nests without fail. He did not know that the atmosphere also goes with the earth. This was more than eleven hundred years before Galileo and there is nothing to show that Aryabhata suffered in the least for his views. For Aryabhata's view vide 'Aryabhatiyam by W. E. Clark (Chicago, 1930 ) p. 64. As observed by Archibald Robertson the history of the Rationalist movement in Europa is to a very great extent the history of a fight for the right to bold and propagate opinions unpopular for the time being and the growth of religious toleration in Europe has in fact gone hand in hand with the decay of traditional religious beliefs. Reason arrives at different conclusions on the same matter in different ages and even in the same age what appears reasonable to one group of people is held to be unreasonable -by another people. Vide Robert Bridges' 'Testament of Beauty' Book I lines 465-470 on what is reasonable. Millions of people saw fruite falling from tree tops to the earth, but it was only the intuition and logio of Newton that enabled him to formulate the laws of gravitation. 

(Continued from last page) same book and also Tbe flame and the light' by Hugh T. Adson Fausset (London, 1958) pp. 11-12, where the author says that Western man is very little sustained or guided by the doctrines of orthodox Christianity and that European civilization of the last five hundred years la dissolving. 

2425 अइलोमगति स्थः पश्यत्यचलं विलोमर्ग यहत् अचलानि भान्ति तद्वत्समपन्धित भगानि लापान । आर्यभट्टीय, गोलपाद verse 

1478 



Seo. VIII, Ch. XXXIII 

Doubt has been and is a frequent and legitimate attitude of the mind as recognised by the Bf. Up. (I. 5. 3) Kāmah sankalpo vioikitsa sraddbā, aśraddhā, dhritir, adhritir hrir-dhir bhir-etyetat sarvam mana ova' (desire, fancy, doubt, faith, want of faith, steadiness, restlessness, shame, understanding, fear, all these are aspects of mind). Even the Rgveda (11. 12. 5) refers to doubters about Indra (utom āhur-naisostityonam'). In the Katha Up. Naciketas says "when a man dies there is tha doubt, some saying 'he (the self) exists', others saying 'he ceases to exist" and prays to Yama to resolve that doubt for him as the third boon. 

Descartes held that only one truth is beyond doubt viz, coyito ergo sum (I think, therefore I am). In Europe the whole of the 18th and 19th centuries were dominated as far as thought ful men were concerned by boundless faith in reason and progress. But owing to the two world wars ( particularly the second), their aftermath and the rise of two powerful Communist countries have greatly weakened the faith in progress guided by reason and ethics, faith in the dignity of man and in equality is on the decline and is assailed in many regions and the view that might creates or is right is gaining ground. 

The Upanisada teach that a sound moral preparation must precede the acquisition of true vedantic view. The Bļ. Up. states therefore one who knows this, after securing quiescence, restraining his senses, being free from all hankerings, bearing with fortitude all pairs of opposites (such as heat and cold), having his mind concentrated, sees the Self in the self, looks upop everything as Ātman'; the Kathopaniṣad II. 24 says 'one who has not ceased from doing evil actions, who is not quiescent, who bas not concentrated his mind nor has made his mind quiescent would not realize this Self by correct knowledge'; Praśna I 16 those secure the pure world of brahman who are free from crookedness, falsehood and deceitful conduct'; Sv. Up. VL 22 'this highly esoteric knowledge of Vedanta should not be imparted to one whose mind is not quiescent or who is not a son or disciple'. The great formula thou art That' teaches one to look upon all men as Atman or as the Gita (VI, 29-30) puts it "he who is endowed with Yoga and knows Atman to be in everything and everything as abiding in Ātman, is not lost to the Lord nor is the Lord lost to him'. Compare Isa Up. 6 and Manu XII. 91. In the Chan, Up. (III. 16. 1) man is symbolically represented as sacrifice and in III, 17, 4 it is statedVedāntu supports pure morality 

1479 

that lapas, charity, straightforward conduct, ahimga and truth fulness are the dakṣiṇā (sacrificial fees). 

This shows that Vedānta in its highest form is the best support of pure morality for individuals. It is on account of this teaching that many sages cultivated these virtues in hermitages and were honoured by kings and common people in ancient times in India, but in medieval times the gages became2426 rare and as regards common people they were tied down by customs and caste and very few people made strenuous efforts for solidarity of all their countrymen, for meeting their common needs and safeguarding all peoples' interests; and by the side of sublime philosophical tonets our country witnessed abject poverty among large masses of people and political domination by alien or brutal invaders. The tendency to rely on the Vedas, to believe and to argue that what has been is the best, and to appeal to the past has been very strong throughtout our history for centuries. Our motto must not be 'back to the Vedas' but rather 'forward with the Vedas'. While giving due weight to the Veda and authority, we must not condemn all independence in thought. 

Some Western rationalists such as Bentham, James Mill and John S. Mill put forward the theory of utilitarianism which briefly comes to this that actions are to be judged by their consequences and are right in proportion as they tend to make for the greatest good or happiness of the community or of the greatest number. This theory has great drawbacks, the most important being that it is not really a moral theory at all ag it does not tell us exactly what a man or community ought to do. Religions tell their followers what they ought to do or not to do. Another difficulty is that what may appear to one man as being for the greatest good of the greatest number may not be so accepted by others and further it is diffioult to define what the greatest number regards as good or happiness. Besides, many non care nothing at all about the happiness of others. Moral, political and economic actions are confused by this dootrine. In practice, as the emphasis was put on happiness, this theory 

2426. Even in these days our country can produce men imbued with the trae spirit of Advaita-vedānta like Raman Maharshi, the sage of Arunachal (1879–1950) about whom Arthur Osborne has pablished a very interesting and revealing work 'Raman Mabarabi and the path of Self-knowledge (Rider and Co, 1954). 

1480 . History of Dharmadastra Seo. VIII, Ch. Xxxft was made the excuse for epicurianism and indulgence in things material 

The present author is not at all against freedom of thought, but what he objects to is making a fetish of rationalism and making millions of common men and women water in their faith and principles of conduct by the constant talk of the non existence of God or of the individual soul &c. The rationalists and utilitarians hardly agrae upon any values and principles of conduct to be inculcated among ordinary young men and women. If God and soul be eliminated, they have not been able to put something niore valuable in their place, for which the young generation that is growing up would be ready to live laborious days or to sacrifice thomselves. Though we may not subscribe to the position that the last word of wisdom on all religious and social matters is to be found in the Veda or in the works of ancient sages and writers, even wise men may hesitate before they decide the question whether we should carry on a campaign for eradicating beliefs in God and an immortal self. The Gitā strikes the right note for most people when it utters the warning (III. 26 ) 'let not the knowing or wise man (the jñānin or vidrān) unsettle the minds of the ignorant that are attached to (certain) actions (by babit); the enlightened man, himself doing all work in the true spirit of a yogin, should set others to do all actions.' 

As a result of the two world wars in which unspeakable atrocities and barbarities 2427 were committed by highly educated and organized countries most of whose people professed Christianity, there is a revulsion of feeling and Beveral eminent men are busy in attributing the present difficulties to the decay of religious belief and in inviting bumanity to return to religion. But the crux of the problem is what religious beliefs and practices are to be inculcated and practised by men in the present age. It appears to the present writer that religions can hardly be a panaces for the ills of the world. Very large blocks of modern educated men are dissatisfied with the tenets and practices of several current religions and their authorita tive books. The real difficulty to be grappled with is to 

2427. Vida 'Scoarge of the Svastika' by Lord Russell of Liverpool p. 171 where he cites the confession of Höss that not less than three million people were put to death at Auscbwitz, 2500000 of them by gas cbambert 

nad oq p. 250 bo remarks 'the murder by the Germans of over five million 

· Baropeaa Jews constitutes the greatest crime lo World History.' 

;. : Different virtues stressed in different ages 1481* define what must be the contant of the faith that would appeal to and secure the allegiance of moet a all good, intellectual and educated modern mon. At different times different virtue (such as monachism, charity, humility, patriotism, social service or philanthrophism ) were proached as of supreme import anoe. The growth of the virtue of patriotism and of the fealing af nationalism in Western countries was not due to Christianity's teachings but to various other causes in Europe'a political and economic history. There are religious virtues, heroio virtanes, amiable virtues &C. The Christian people of Earope and Amerioa during the last four contaries achieved great wealth and prosperity by throwing to the winds the virtues preached in the Sermon on the Mount, by extending their colonial empires' for exploiting vast regions, by decimating millions of unoffend. ing backward races, by hunting human beings as if they were beasts and forcing on thom slavery and by preaching from the house tops the great need of competition in all spheres and worshipping it as if it were God. After the holocaust of the great wars, many eminent men, not only religious man, but even those that occupy positions in Government and political life, preach the necessity of the moral sense, of benevolence and kindness towards others, restraint, unselfishness and a desire to allow others to share in the good things of life, which virtues were emphasized for all men in the Bs. Up. V. %. 1-3 quoted above 2428 

In India Emperor Asoka in the 3rd century B. C. inculoated in bis Edicts tolerance for the Brahmanio and the Buddhist faith (vide pp. 1011-12 above). Asoka does not enter into dogma of any kind, but regarding himself aa the father of all his subjeots enjoins on them a morality that is practical and would be acceptable to all, such as tolerance, humanity, charity to monks :: and also to the poor and compassion towards dumb animals... Later on, it was at the most necessary to show that the doctrines.' put forth by reasoning were not directly opposed to the diota 

2428. Archibald Robertson in "Rationalism ia theory and Practice" (Watts and co, London 1954) Asserts (on page 41) that Christian morals have never been practised and that a society would not last for a month if rani on the lines of the Sermon on the Mount. W, R. Mathews in Christi (London, 1939) agrees (on page 76) with Professor Whitehead that the adop tion of the priaciples of the Sermon on the Mouat literally understood on any large scale would moan the sudden death of civilization, C. H. Tawney in 'Acquisitive Society (1921) assorts that what was Christian in ; Christianity bad largely disappeared from about 1700 A, D, (pages 12-13). " 

: 8, D. 186 

1482 

History of Dharmaśāstra [ Soc. VIII, oh XXXIII 

of the Veda. To take only one example: though the Upaniṣads express Advaita in such Mabāvākyas 'abam brahmāsmi' (Oh. Up. III. 14. 1), 'tat-tvam-asi' (Ch. Up. VI. 8,7), Madhvācārya could expound bis thorough-going dvaita doctrine, could explain away by reasoning the above passages and olaim to be the only true expounder of Veda and denounce the advaita dootrine ag Buddhism in disguise without any serious persecution on either side. Yājñavalkya (II. 192 ) calls upon the king to safeguard the special usages of guilds and heretics and their modes of livelihood. This tolerance for multiplicity of forms and practices in religion and for diametrically opposed philosophio views has had aleo its weakness viz. it permitted the growth of endless variations in the formulation of faith, ritual and philo sophic doctrines and lod in great measure to several abuses, to somo unhealthy and even revolting practices. 