+++
title = "364 यो ऽकामाम्"

+++
**(verses 8.364-368)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.287-218).—‘A man who carries away a decorated maiden,
of the same caste as himself, shall pay the highest amercement; but the
lowest amercement, if she is not decorated; if she belongs to a higher
caste, corporal punishment shall be inflicted. If the man has earned
away a maiden of a caste lower than himself, there is no offence, if she
has gone with her consent; otherwise, the fine inflicted shall be of the
lowest degree. If the maiden has been defiled, the hands of the man
shall he cut off; and he shall he killed if the maiden is of a higher
caste.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Aparārka, p. 859).—‘If the man has intercourse with an
unwilling maiden, he shall have two of his fingers cut off, and he shall
also pay a fine. If the maiden is of a higher caste, he shall he killed.
If the maiden belongs to the same caste and has been willing, he shall
pay the nuptial fee and also give her ornaments and a double dowry, and
then accept her as wife.’

*Nārada* (12.71-72).—‘When a man has connection with a maiden against
her will, he shall have two fingers cut off. If the maiden belongs to
the highest caste, death and the confiscation of his entire property
shall he his punishment. When, however, he has connection with a willing
maiden, it is no offence; hut he shall bestow ornaments on her, honour
her with other presents and then lawfully espouse her.’

*Bṛhaspati* (23.10).—‘The King shall confiscate the entire property of
one who violates an unwilling woman; and having his penis and scrotum
cut off, shall cause him to he paraded on an ass.’

*Āpastamba* (2.26-21).—‘If one has intercourse with a maiden, his
porperty shall he confiscated and he shall be banished.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 401).—‘One who violates an unwilling
maiden, shall he immediately killed; if he defiles her with her consent,
he shall he fined the first amercement.’

*Ārthaśāstra* (p. 172).—‘If one violates a maiden of the same caste as
himself, before puberty, his hands shall be cut off, or he shall be
fined four hundred; if she has attained puberty, his middle and index
fingers shall be cut off, or a fine of 200 shall be imposed, and he
shall pay damages to her father.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 173).—‘If one outrages a girl after marriage, he
should pay a fine of 54 Paṇas; he shall also make good the nuptial fee
paid by her husband and also the expenses of her marriage.’

Do. (p. 172).—‘One may make love to a maiden who has had seven monthly
courses, who has not met her husband after her betrothal; nor shall he
pay any damages to the father. If three years have elapsed since her
puberty there is no offence in a man of the same caste having
intercourse with her after three years; even one of inferior caste
incurs no offence, if the girl is not decorated; he would be a thief if
he took with the girl the ornaments given her by her father.’

Do. (p. 174).—‘If a girl is willingly deflowered by another girl of the
same caste, she should pay a fine of 12 Paṇas, and the woman who has
outraged her, double of that. If a man deflowers a girl without her
consent, he shall be fined a hundred and shall also pay the nuptial fee.
If she has deflowered herself, she should he made the King’s slave. If
one forcibly takes away a maiden, he should he fined 200; if she is
adorned with golden ornaments, then the highest amercement.’
