Ṛg.+++
title = "36 Characteristics of Hindu Culture"

+++

SECTION X

The fundamental conceptions and characteristics of Hindu (Bharatiya) culture and civilization from the Vedic times to about 1800 A. D. and future trends.

CHAPTER XXXVI

Fundamental and leading characteristics of Hindu culture and civilization

It is necessary to gather together the threads scattered over six thousand pages of the History of Dharmaśāstra and to emphasize the fundamental and leading characteristics and conceptions of Hindu culture and civilization.

The word Hindu ( in the form 'Hidu') appears to have been applied by the Persian[^2600] Emperors Darius ( 522-486 B.O.) and Xerxes ( 486-465 B. O.) to the territory and people to the west and to the east of the great river Sindhu, while the Greeks referred to the people in the same region as 'Indoi', from which comes the word 'Indian'. Herodotus in his History (Loeb series) states that the Thracians were the biggest nation in the world next to the Indians (Book 5 para 3, vol. III p.5) and that the Indians constituted the 20th province of the Persian Empire and paid 360 talents of gold dust as tribute. The word 'Sindhu' occurs more than two hundred times in the Ṛgveda alone in the singular as well as in the plural The words 'Sindbavaḥ' and  'Sapta Sindhūn' occur more frequently than Sindhu in the singular. Indra is often described as having let loose the seven Sindhus for flowing (Ṛg. I. 32.12, II. 12.12, IV. 28.1, VIII, 96.1, X, 43.3). In such passages what is meant is the great river Sindhu and its tributaries (or possibly its seven mouths ).

[^2600]: Vide the Naqkh-i-Rustam Inscription of Dāraya-ush (Darius ) and the Persepolis Inscription of Kshayārsha (Xerxes) in 'Select Inscriptions' edited by Dr. D. C. Sircar, No. 4 p. 10 and No. 5 p. 12. Sanskrit 'sa' is changed to 'ba'even now in some parts of our country, The ancient Parsi scripture Vendidad (S.B.E. Vol IV p, 2) mentions sixteen lands out of which nine can be identified, the 15th being Hapta Hindu (Sapta Sindhu).

Many passages of the Ṛgveda where the singular is employed refer to the river Sindhu alone (as in Ṛg. II, 15.6, IV. 30.12, V. 4.9 &c). In Ṛg. II, 15.6 it is said that Indra made Sindhu flow northwards. This would obviously refer to the first part of the river flowing northward from the Himalayas. Pāṇini uses the word 'Sindhu' as the name of a country in IV. 3.93 ('Saindhava' means one who or whose ancestors lived in the Sindhu country). For the fluctuating limits of Āryāvarta, vide H. of Dh. Vol. II pp. 11-16 and p. 1525, note 2483 above, where Ṛg. passages about Bharatas are set out and it is shown that the Purāṇas speak of Bharata-varṣa as of the same extent as that of modern India and the name is said to have been due to Bharata, son of Duṣyanta and Śakuntalā. Bharatavarṣa occurs in the Hathigumpha Inscription of Khāravela ( line 10 on p. 79) which cannot be assigned to a date later than the 1st century[^2601] B. C. It has been shown above (p. 1016 n. 1649 ) that Aśoka in one of his edicts refers to his kingdom as Jambudvipa. Even in those days in the rather long _saṅkalpa_ ( declaration) at the beginning of a religious act in Mahārāṣtra, occur the words "Jambudvipe Bharatavarṣe Bauddhāvatāre Godāvaryā dakṣiṇetire' &c. Therefore, the proper word to be used by us for our country should be Bharatavarṣa. It may be said that our culture and.civilization had throughout the past ages a geographical background. The Constitution of India has recognized this in its very first Article which runs 'India, that is Bharat, shall be a union of States'. In view of the fact, however, that the words  'Hindu' and' Indian' have been employed for centuries by foreign as well as our own writers, this work will employ those words instead of ' Bharatavarṣa'.

The words 'culture' and civilization' are used as synonyms by some writers, while some others regard them as quite distinguishable. These two are defined in various ways by scholars. A few definitions are set out here by way of sample.

Dr. Tyler states (in ‘Primitive Culture' vol. I p, 1, Murray, London, 1871) 'Culture or civilization is that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, law, custom and any other capabilities and habits acquired by man is a member of society'.

[^2601]: Vide E, I, vol. XX pp. 71-89, Scholars differ about the date of this Inscription, Jayaswal holding (ibid, p. 77 ) that it belongs to the first half of the 2nd century B.C., while N. N. Ghosh in J. G. J. R. I, vol. VI pp. 97-106 opines that it belongs to the last quarter of the first century B.C.

 Matthew Arnold's definition of culture in his lengthy essay on Culture and Anarchy' (1869, Preface p. VIII) is rather restricted in scope. He regards culture as a 'pursuit of our total perfection by means of getting to know, on all the matters which concern us, the best which has been thought and said in the world, and through this knowledge turning a stream of fresh and free thought upon our stock notions and habits which we know follow staunchly but mechanically, vainly imagining that there is a virtue in following them staunchly which makes up for the mischief of following them mechanically. Prof. P. A. Sorokin in Social and Cultural Dynamics' (1957, p.2) defines human culture as 'the sum total of everything which is created or modified by the conscious or unconscious activity of two or more individuals interacting with one another or conditioning one another's behaviour[^2602]. Prof. Edgerton in Journal of American Oriental Society in a paper on the Dominant ideas in the formation of Indian Culture' (vol, 62 for 1942 pp. 151–156) understands culture as a total way of life viewed as a norm and as such approved or at least tolerated by a people as a whole and by its articulate representatives generally.

Prof. Toynbee in 'Civilizations on trial' (1948) states (p. 223) 'I mean by a civilization the smallest unit of historical study at which one arrives when one tries to understand the history of his own country, U.S.A., gay, or U.K.' Prof. Toynbee in his latest work ' Reconsiderations' (vol. XII pp. 76–77, of his Study of History) adopts Bagbey's definition of culture as meaning 'regularities in the behaviour, internal and external, of the members of a Society, excluding those regularities which are clearly hereditary in origin' and adds that 'religious practices and institutions and, by implication, also religious beliefs and experiences are certainly a part of culture as thus defined' and mentions religion together with art, technology, social structure as examples of the elements of which culture consists( pp. 84, 95).

[^2602]: Prof. Sorokin (ibid. pp. 24–25) distinguishes two types of integrated cultures, one called ideational and the other sensate. None of the two has, according to him, existed in the purest form. In some cultures the first type prevails, in others the 2nd; while in still others both might mingle in equal proportions and on equal basis. This last he terms 'idealistic type' (which is not to be confused with the ideational type ). Dr. G. S. Ghurye's 'Culture and Society' (University of Bombay Publications, 1947) is a very useful book on culture and civilization and considers at length the views of eminent writers like Emerson, Arnold, Morley, Whitehead, Russell, Laski, Wells and others. Prof. Northrop in 'Meeting of East and West' (1946) and Prof. Sorokin in Social Philosophies in an age of crisis' (London, 1952 ) p. 145 hold that the total culture of a nation in the East or West is not a mere heap of numerous phenomona unrelated to each other but rather as grounded in differing philosophical conceptions of the nature of man and of the universe.

Prof. Toynbee further says that in his volumes he employed the word 'culture' in two different senses, viz. (1) the comprehensive one in which it is used by Bagby and (2) in an exclusive sense in which the word has been current in contemporary English since the time of Matthew Arnold ( ibid. p. 272). As regards the word "civilization' he remarks (p.273 ) that civilization is a hybrid word of modern French coinage and Johnson refused to include it in his dictionary.

Archibald Robertson (in 'Rationalism in theory and practice', London, 1954 p. 62 ) says "when we use the word civilization', we mean a society with enough command over nature to raise it above savagery or barbarism. Civilization primarily means 'civitas' city life, division of labour and consequent surplus production over and above mere animal needs.' Vide Prof. 8. Levi's book 'L'Inde et le Monde'p 63 translated in H. Kraemer's' World cultures and world religions'( London 1960 ) p. 315 where it is really a definition of Hindu civilization alone.

It is unnecessary to cite further definitions. We may accept any one of these for a working hypothesis. If a distinction is to be made between the two words, one may say that the word 'culture', being neutral in meaning, is the better one to use than the word 'civilization'. The latter word is often employed for an advanced stage of social development and is contrasted with the stage of primitive or barbarian societies. People often speak of primitive culture, but rarely, if at all, of primitive civilization.

During the last 6000 years of human history, several cultures and civilizations rose and fell. Spengler, a militarist and anti-rationalistio author, who does not rely on religion, morality or politics but is a votary of force, examines about thirty civilizations and cultures and propounds the thesis that all of them (except seven or eight) follow & certain common pattern, viz. they are born, grow, decline and die and that once defunct they are not revived. Prof. Toynbee, a Christian ( and not a militarist) in his 'Study of History' appears to arrive at conclusions not unlike those of Spengler, viz, culture and societies have stages of childhood, maturity, senility and disintegration. On p. 758 of Volume IX of his 'Study of History' he gives a table for nineteen civilizations with the dates of their Epiphany (manifestation), of their breakdown and the span of growth phase in number of years. He puts down Indic civilization as starting in 1375 B.C. and as breaking down in 725 B. C. and Hindu civilization as beginning in 775 A. D. and its breakdown in 1175 A. D. This is, to say the least, most objectionable[^2603]. The distinction between Indic and Hindu civilization is arbitrary and the dates also are so. Why the Hindu civilization is held by him as breaking down in 1175 A. D. is quite unconvincing and what was the nature or name of India's civilization between 725 B. C. and 775 A. D. is not stated by him. On the other hand, the whole metaphor of being born, growing, maturing and disintegrating is held inapplicable to civilizations by other distinguished writers, such as J. G. De Beus in the 'Future of the West' (London, 1953), who remarks that civilizations are not born and they do not die (p. 60 ), but are transformed or absorbed. Prof. Sorokin asserts (in 'Social and Cultural Dynamics") that his theory has little in common with the age-old theories of the life cycle of culture and societies with stages of childhood, maturity, senility and decay (p. 627). Leonard Woolf in 'Quack, quack' mercilessly criticizes Spengler's theories (pp. 139-160). A. L. Kroeber in 'Style and Civilizations' (New York, 1957 ) agrees with Prof. Sorokin and disagrees with Spengler and Toynbee and remarks that 'the study of civilizations can hardly become truly scientific or scholarly until it divests itself of emotional concern about crisis, decay, collapse, extinction and doom' (p. 160).

[^2603]: While these pages were passing through the press, I received Prof. Toynbee's 'Reconsiderations' (Vol. XII of his Study of History ) on p. 184 of which he revises his opinion by saying " the maintenance of the brahmans' monopoly of the religious ministry gives Indian History a continuity throughout the period running from the Aryan invasion to the impact of the West".

Among the numerous civilizations and cultures that flourished in the world there are only two (namely, the Indian and the Chinese ) that have survived and kept up a continuity of tradition for four thousand years (if not more ) in spite of recurrent invasions by foreign hordes like those by Persians, Greeks, Scythians, Huns, Turks and notwithstanding internal conflicts and convulsions[^2604]. India absorbed such people and made many Greeks, Sakas and other foreigners adopt the spiritual ideologies of India and found for them a place in the Indian social fabric ( as has been and will be shown later). Not only so, India could spread its literature, religion, art and culture, not by invasions or annexations but mostly by peaceful means, viz. teaching, translations of Sanskrit works and persuasion, to Ceylon, Burma, Sumatra, Malaya, Java, Bali, Borneo, China, Tibet, Japan, Mongolia and Corea[^2605]. The charming island of Bali is still Hindu with four varṇas, priests being called Pedanda (Pandita), consecrated water for worship being called _Toya_ (vide S. Levi's 'Sanskrit texts from Bali' Preface p. XII G.O.S.), priests still repeating one quarter of Gāyatri, viz. 'bhargo devasya dhimahi' (ibid. p. XV) and repeating the yajñopavita mantra (yajñopavitam paramam etc.) in a corrupt form.

This persistence of Indian culture and civilization for Beveral millennia requires an explanation and a consideration of the fundamental conceptions, values and characteristics of that civilization would enable us to offer a satisfactory one Indian culture and civilization have a distinct personality and should not and could not be judged by purely European standards.

[^2604]: Vide Prof. Sorokin in Social and Cultural Dynamics' p. 697. Dr. Radhakrishnan in 'Religion and Society' (1947) p. 101.

[^2605]: The number of works and papers on the spread of Indian culture in South East Asia, China and what is called 'Further India' or 'Greater India' is very large. A few only out of those that the author has read or consulted are mentioned here : Dr. R.C. Majumdar's 'Ancient Indian Colonies' Vol. I and II; 'Towards Angkor' with 42 illustrations, 1937 and 'Making of Greater India'( London, 1951 ), both by H.G Quaritch Wales, the latter containing a good Bibliography; 'Sri Vijaya' by Prof. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, 1949, with an appendix of Inscriptions from 683 A. D. to about the 14th century A, D, .Civilizations of the East' by Rene Grousset, translated from French by Catherine A, Phillips with 249 illustrations, Vol. II on 'India, Farther India and Malaya' pp. 1-343. For China's debt to India, vide Viśvabhārati Quarterly, Vol. II pp. 251-261 by Prof. Liang Chi Chao, who states that Hindu scholars that came to China from 8th century A. D. were 24 and Chinese scholars that went to India for study from 265 A. D. to 790 A. D. numbered 187 (the names of 105 out of those being ascertained ); vide also India and China' by Prof. P.C. Bagchi (Hind Kitabs, 1950), particularly chapters II and III.

##Conceit of nations about their Mission

Various peoples during past centuries had the conceit that they were far superior to others and had a mission to propagate. When the British empire became so extensive that the 'Sun never set on it', many British imperialists claimed (most hypocritically) that they were carrying on the white man's burden[^2605A] for the benefit and betterment of undeveloped and backward people ( when British Imperialism was impoverishing to the utmost, the people whom they governed by their colonial policies as will be briefly indicated later on so far as India is concerned). Russia claims that it has the mission to liberate the proletariat from capitalism and to bring about a Paradise on Earth. The Germans under Hitler believed that they belonged to the superior Nordic race and that they would save the world from communism. Such a conceit is not confined to the West. The Chinese believed that they alone were civilized. The Japanese hold that their Emperor is the son of Heaven. In these days some Indians also claim that spirituality existed nowhere except in India. It is quite correct to say that ancient Indian culture and civilization were based on great spiritual values. It would be entirely in the wrong to say that other people had no spirituality. All that we can at most say is that spirituality is more basic to Hinduism and was more diffused among Hindu people than anywhere else. The Manusmṛti provides that only those usages of varṇas and mixed castes that are traditionally prevalent in the country of Brahmāvarta, in Kurukṣetra, in the countries of Matsya, Pañcāla (the country called Doab) and Sūrasena (round about Mathurā) are spoken of as _sadācāra_ (II, 17–19) and that all men on the earth should learn their respective duties from brāhmaṇas born in those countries. The Manusmṛti excludes the countries of Madhyadeśa (as defined by it) and Āryāvarta from this provision (II 21–22). Recently, some people appear to rely on the words 'kṛṇvanto viśvam-āryam' occurring in Ṛg. IX. 63. 5-6 and hold that the Veda has put forward the mission of our country as making the whole world _ārya_. But there is hardly any foundation for this conceit. These words occur about the offering of Soma juice (indavaḥ) to Indra. They only mean this-these Soma libations, brown in colour,[^2506] (pressed from Soma plant) increase (the might of) Indra, making the waters to fall (from the sky ), destroy hostile men coming to Indra, making all (the whole environment ) noble they reach their proper sphere.' There is here no reference whatever to Vedic people making the whole world Ārya. At the most these verses may be interpreted as suggesting that Soma sacrifices to Indra would make the world Arya. Then there is no message in it which modern Indians can give and spread. Soma plant itself became unavailable in Vedic times and substitutes had to be utilized. And hardly any solemn Vedic sacrifices have been performed for centuries in India and very rarely, if at all, Soma sacrifices.

[^2605A]: Vide Leonard Woolf in 'Barbarians at the Gate' (London, 1939 ) p. 54 for saying that 'white man's burden' was another name for economic imperialism and also p. 162.

[^2606]: इन्द्रं वर्धन्तो अप्तुरः <u> कृण्वन्तो विश्वमार्यम् </u>। अपघ्नन्तो अराष्णः ॥ सुता अनु स्वमा रजोऽम्यर्षन्ति बभ्रवः । इन्द्रं गच्छन्त इन्दवः ॥ऋ. IX.63.5-63 compare verse 14 of the same hymn एते धामान्यार्या शुक्रा ऋतस्य धारया । वाजं गोमन्तमक्षरन . The words <u> घामान्यार्या </u> mean the 'noble dwellings or noble statutes ' (of Gods).

During the last four or five hundred years the Western patrons professing Christianity started on a career of conquest, exploitation of undeveloped countries and peoples, colonial empires, use of the discoveries of science for competitive purposes, the amassing of wealth with such ideologies as those expressed in the words everybody should be for himself and the devil take the hind-most.' But the devastation and atrocities of the last two world wars and the possibility of the annihilation of the human race or a very large part of it by atomic warfare have now opened the eyes of many thoughtful leaders and people in the West that, if modern civilization is to be saved, they must cultivate regard for spiritual values, love of righteousness and justice, sympathy with the oppressed, and active belief in the brotherhood of man. Though our ancient sages and lawgivers laid great emphasis on spiritual values, & very large majority of our people and so-called leaders have been wanting in the practice of those values for centuries. Instead of merely praising our past glories, the present author would humbly request all educated Indians to be introspective and to ponder over certain questions that are often asked and seek to find the reasons for the loss of our freedom from the 13th century onwards. (1) Why Hindus were generally found inferior to the invaders, Persian, Greek, Scythian, Turk, English, even though Indians far outnumbered and even though most invaders were impressed by the courage and perfect indifference to death on the part of India's soldiers; (2) Why Hindus could not form a permanent organized State comprising the whole of India for many centuries; (3) why did they fail to take advantage of the splendid natural resources of India to excel in manufactures, commerce and industry. We must enter upon a thoroughgoing and honest inquiry into our past to find our own defects (political and others ) that led to our fall for centuries and try to remove those defects as quickly as possible, now that Bhārata has won independence after centuries. There was no political unity of the whole of India till the British began to rule over the whole of India. There were constant wars among Hindu kingdoms and princes. For example, because the Marathas invaded Bengal, the Bengalis hated Marathas and were jubilant Over the defeat of the Marathas by the British. We Indians hardly had any deep-seated feeling of all Indians being one people or of nationalism till the 2nd half of the 19th century A. D. This chapter cannot discuss at length the subject of the causes of the downfall of India, politically and in other respects. But a few remarks would not be altogether out of place here.

Hinduism is a combination of many systems and religious ideologies including Vedic ritualism, Vedāntic thought, Vaiṣṇavism, Saivism, Shāktism and primeval cults, adapted to the requirements of different types of men and communities with great disparities of intellectual and spiritual attainments. There were only a few matters that would be said to have bound most of the Hindus to each other, viz. the doctrine of Karma and Punarjanma, the unifying influence of the vast and venerated Sanskrit literature that gradually enriched the regional languages, the veneration in which the Vedas were held by all Hindus as the final authority in religious matters, though only a small minority could learn and understand them, the geographical unity of the country from the Himalaya to Cape Comorin emphasized by the Purāṇas and by the pilgrimages to holy places from Mānasa lake and Badrinath to Rameśvara. These few elements, however, were not enough to neutralize the causes that militated against effective unity amongst all Hindus. Most of the acāryas and saints laid too much emphasis on other worldiness and Vedanta and did not lay equal or greater emphasis on or recognize the importance of active and thorough performance of people's duties to themselves, to their families, and to society, the result being that many people, whether fit or unfit, tried to become otherworldly and did not actively pursue worldly values with righteousness. Another cause of disunity and downfall was the great disparity between the high meta physical teaching of the whole world being one and the treatment meted out to lower classes and untouchables, owing to ideas of exclusiveness, of purity and pollution by touch &o. The education of the masses was greatly neglected[^2607] and the higher classes did not seriously mind who ruled the country as long as their life was not much disturbed. The great patriot and revolutionary Savarkar, hammered on seven fetters by which Hindu society was bound for centuries, viz. untouchability, prohibitions of several kinds viz. sea travel, of mutual dining among the hundreds of castes and subcastes, of intercaste marriages, of Veda study against several castes, prohibition against following certain occupations and prohibition against re-admission to Hinduism of people that were converted to other religious faiths by force, fraud or ignorance.

Our cultural history shows some central features which may be mentioned in one place here. The first is that there has been an unbroken religious tradition from the Vedic times almost to the present day. Vedic mantras are still employed throughout the whole of India in religious rites and ceremonies by all brāhmaṇas and by a large number of the members of castes claiming to be Kṣatriyas and Vaiśyas. The Vedic gods are not entirely forgotten. Kindling of Agni is still required at the beginning of all rites; Viṣṇu (though not so frequently praised as Indra, Agni or Varuṇa, yet often enough, is praised in Ṛg. I. 22 . 16-21, I. 154. 1-6, I. 155. 1-6, VI. 69. 1-8, both Indra and Viṣṇu are praised in Ṛg. VII. 99. 1-7, Atharvaveda VII. 27.4-9 ) and Śiva (Rudra of the Ṛgveda, transformed a great deal yet highly praised in Ṛg. II. 1.6, II, 33,9, X. 92.9 where he is spoken of as Śiva) are even now the principal deities worshipped. In the morning and evening Sandhyā worship, brāhmaṇas in many parts of India still repeat respectively verses addressed to Mitra (Ṛg. III. 59 ) and Varuṇa (Ṛg. I. 25 ). The second feature is that, India being a vast country (as large as the whole of Europe minus Russia ), central authority in political power never existed (except perhaps for a short time under Aśoka). The ideal was that of supreme ruler ( _saṁrāt_ or _cakravartin_).

[^2607]: Vide Works of Vivekananda (Mayavati ed. Vol. III. pp. 191-192, 428–29, V. 122, VI, 224). The census of 1951 disclosed that there were fifty-one million untouchables in Bhārata.

## No common front against invaders

But, if a king submitted, acknowledged the prowess of the successful conqueror and paid some tribute, no saṁrāṭ troubled himself to look into the affairs of the kingdoms ruled by petty kings. There could, therefore, be no common front against a foreign invader, no uniformity in laws, customs and practices and there were frequent wars among kings and petty princes. A third feature was that there did not develop a serious clash of cultures, there was tolerance about varying ideologies and beliefs and constant adaptation to create harmony in diversity.

It makes one sad to find that not a single Hindu scholar resembling Alberuni came forward to inquire into the causes of the successful invasions of India by Mahmud of Gazni and later hordes. Intellectuals were mostly engaged at least from the 11th century onwards in composing works of thousands of pages on such topics as Vrata, Dāna, Srāddha ( as the very learned minister Hemādri did) or in mental gymnastics about logic, Vedānta, Poetics and similar subjects and appear to have bestowed little thought on finding means of meeting the onslaught of foreignons or the remedies for removing their own weaknesses and defects. There were also other causes of the downfall of Hindus. Our intellectuals did not or could not pursue and make their own discoveries of science and technology made in the world from the 15th century A. D. Shahaji purchased firearms from foreigners. Neither he, nor his great son Shivaji, the founder of the Maratha empire, started factories for the manufacture of up-to-date firearms and cannon. Similarly, our people did not properly appreciate the role of a powerful navy. If the Hindus or their rulers had possessed a powerful navy they would have been able to nip in the bud the ambitions of the Portuguese, the French and the English,

We must now get out the important characteristics of Hindu culture and civilization.

1. The most striking conception even as early as the Ṛgveda is that there is only one Reality or Essence, in spite of the fact that people speak of it or worship it as Indra, Mitra, Varuṇa, Agni &c. ( Ṛg. I. 164. 46, VIII. 58. 1, X. 129. 2. q. above on p. 1487). In the Mahābhārata, Purāṇas, in classical Sanskrit Poetry and even in medieval times, when there were various cults and schisms, such as the worship of Viṣṇu or Śiva or Śakti, almost all Hindus had an inner consciousness that God is one though called by various names; vide p. 118 note 306, p. 973 and note 1593 above, and Harivaṁśa (Viṇṇuparva 23. 31 ), Kumāra sambhava VII, 44.

2. From this conception arose the great tolerance that Hinduism at all times showed to freedom of thought and worship, which has been dwelt upon by the present author in H. of Dh. Vol. II p. 388 note 928, Vol. V. pp. 970-71, 1011-1018 (references to Asoka's edicts and Yaj. I. 343 and numerous instances of Indian kings and donors of one persuasion making gifts to temples and institutions of other cults and persuasions ); vide also Gitā 7. 21-22 and 9.23. To hunt down heretics, real or supposed, has been a favourite business of some religiong[^2608] for centuries. This has been absent from Hinduism. Hindusim is not bound by any fixed creed nor does it rely on a single book2608 or a prophet as its founder. All that it requires is that man shoud be God-fearing and what matters is not correct beliefs but moral conduct and social behaviour. Hindus do not deny the truth of any religion or reject the validity of another man's religious experience. A verse2609 quoted below breathes a broad-minded approach to religious beliefs and worship 'May Hari, the Lord of the three worlds, bestow on you the desired reward, whom the Śaivas worship as Śiva, Vedāntins as _brahman_, the Bauddhas as Buddha, the Naiyāykas proficient in the means of knowledge as the Creator, those devoted to Jain teachings as Arhat and Mimāṁsakas as Yajña'. The great logician Udayana who composed his Lakṣaṇāvali in śaka 906 (984 A. D.) breathes in his Nyayakusumānjali the same spirit as is contained in the verse translated above. Tolerance is thus of the essence of Hinduism and even an atheist is often met with amusement and not with persecution.

[^2608]: For Biblical intolerance one may read Jeremiah 29.8-9, Colossians II. 8, Galatians I. 7-9.

[^2609]: यं शैवाः समुपासते शिव इति ब्रह्मेति वेदान्तिनो बौद्धा बुद्ध इति प्रमाणपटवः कर्तेति नैयायिकाः । अर्हन्नित्यथ जैनशासनरताः कर्मेति मीमांसकाः सोऽयं वो विदधातु वाञ्छितफलं त्रैलोक्यनाथो हरिः।

सुभाषितरत्नभाण्डागार (Nir. ed. of 1935 p. 15 verse 27); न्यायकुसुमाञ्जलि I. 2 is: स्वर्गापवर्गयोर्मार्गमामनन्ति मनीषिणः। यदुपास्तिमसावत्र परमात्मा निरूप्यते । इह यद्यपि ये कमपि पुरुषार्थमर्थयमानाः शुद्धबुद्धस्वमाव इत्योपनिषदाः । आदिविद्वान् सिद्ध इति कापिलाः । क्लेशकर्मविपाकाशयैरपरामृष्टो निर्प्नाणकायमार्घष्ठाय सम्प्रदायप्रद्योतकोऽनुग्राहकश्चेति पातञ्जला:। लोकवेदविरुद्धैरपि निर्लेपः स्वतन्त्रश्वेति महापाशुपता: । शिव इति शैवाः । पुरुषोत्तम इति वैष्णवाः । पितामह इति पौराणिका: यज्ञपुरुष इति याज्ञिकाः । निरावरण इति दिगम्बराः । उपास्यत्वेन देशित इति मीमांसकाः । यावदुक्तेरुपपन्न इति नैयायिकाः । लोकव्यवहारसिन्द्र इतिचार्वाकाः। किंबहुना कारवोऽपि यं विश्वकर्मेत्युपासते ।।

III. Working on the doctrine that there is only one Essence or Godhead, the sages of the Upaniṣads arrived at the conclusion that the individual self is non-different from the one Essence, that all manifoldness is only apparent, that even fishermen, slaves, gamblers and the inanimate world are non-different from it. This Vedānta doctrine is one of the most characteristic features of Hinduism and is India's great contribution to the spiritual development of man, though there are sporadic instances of this doctrine having been held by some ancient philosophers in other lands. This idea of one in the many and many in one is the very core or centre of Vedānta. This has been dealt with above ( vide pp. 1499-1500 notes 2451-52 and pp. 1509-10). In Europe the study of philosophy is an end in itself. In ancient India this idea of the unity in diversity was made the basis of education and sociology and it was held that the realization of this unity in one's life was the highest freedom (mokṣa).

The Upaniṣadic teaching is a universal doctrine in which all men of good will can meet and combine, in whatever religion they might have been brought up from their childhood. Many illustrations are adduced in the Upaniṣads to bring home non-difference to the inquirer about the Essence. But two are very apt. The Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad ( III, 2.8) declares "just as rivers flowing ( towards the ocean) become merged in the ocean after giving up their names and forms, so the man who realizes (knows ), being free from name and form, attains the divine Person that is higher than the highest". The Praśnopaniṣad has (VI.5) the same illustration in prose. The Kathopaniṣad IV. 15 states * just as pure water poured into pure water assumes the same form ( appearance ), similarly the soul of the sage who has realized (the Essence ) becomes the Atman (Self). Deussen in his address on 20th February 1893 before the Asiatic Society of Bombay (in J. B. B. R. A. S. No. 18 for 1893 Art 20 pp. 330-340) after quoting the verse of Muṇḍaka III, 2. 8 remarks “It is not the falling of the drops in the infinite ocean, it is the whole ocean returning to that which he really is and has never ceased to be, to his own all-pervading eternal almighty nature" and concludes (p. 340) “ Vedānta in its unfalsified form is the strongest support for morality, is the greatest consolation in the sufferings of life and death; Indians, keep to it," Vide V.S. II. 3.43, where reference is made to Atharvaveda 'Brahma daśā brahma dāsa brahmeme kitavā uta' ( occurring in the Paippalada version as shown by Prof. Durgāmohan Bhattacharya in his paper on a palm-leaf ms. of the Paippalāda-saṁhitā in Adyar Library Bulletin, vol. XXV, parts 1-4 ).

IV. From very ancient Vedic times one of the fundamental conceptions of our Indian culture has been the idea of three spiritual and religious debts owed by a person to the sages, gods and _pitṛs_, which he paid off by the study of the ancient lore, by sacrifices, and by having a son or sons respectively. This subject has been dealt with at length in the H, of Dh. Vol. II pp. 270, 425, 560-61, 676, Vol. VII p. 416 and above. p. 1318 note 2168. To these three debts the Mahābhārata added a fourth viz. the debt owed to all men:paid off by goodness (vide H. of Dh. Vol. III p. 416 1. 675 ). Śabara on Jaimini VI, 2.31 explains that this doctrine is not confined to brāhmaṇas but to all members of the three classes, the word 'brāhmaṇa' used in the Tai. S. and other Vedic texts being only illustrative.

V. Another set of values is contained in the conception of _puruṣārthas_ ( ends or goals of human endeavour) viz. Dharma (right conduct), Artha ( economics, politics and civics ), Kāma (life of sex, of pleasures and aesthetics ), Mokṣa (salvation, release or recovery by the self of its real nature and freedom from the bondage of low desires and aims). Mokṣa is said to be the highest goal (paramapuruṣārtha) and the first three are spoken of as 'trivarga'. The concept of Dharma is a far-reaching one and has been emphasized from very ancient times and refers to the principles which men have to observe in their lives and in social relations. This subject of puruṣarthas and of dharma has been dealt with at some length in H. of Dk. Vol. 1 pp. 2-11 and Vol. III pp. 8-10 and 239-241. Therefore, only a few matters would be briefly emphasized here.

## Noble prayers and virtues emphasized in Upaniṣads

It has been shown above on pp. 1-21 how the Ṛgveda had three words viz. _ṛta_ (cosmic order), _vrata_ (laws or ordinances deemed to be laid down by a god or gods) and _dharma_ (religious rites or sacrifices or fixed principles), how gradually _ṛta_ receded into the back ground and 'satya' took its place and Dharma became an all-embracing conception and vrata came to be restricted to sacred vows and rules of conduct. When a teacher was about to take leave of the pupil at the end of the latter's studenthood he placed in his final exhortation (Tai. Up. I. 11 ) Truth as the first and Dharma as next to it (satyam yada dharmam cara ). The Bṛ. Up. 1. 4. 14 equates _Satya_ with _Dharma_. One of the noblest prayers occurs in the Bṛ. Up. (I. 3. 28 ) 'from falsehood lead me unto truth, from darkness unto light, from death unto life eternal'. The same Upaniṣad in V. 2. 3 inculcates on all men the three cardinal virtues of self-restraint (_dama_), charity (_dāna_) and compassion (_dayā_). The Chān. Up. V. 10 quotes a verse' the thief stealing gold, the drinker of liquor, one who dishonours his guru's bed and the murderer of a brāhmaṇa-- these four fall ( into hell ) and the fifth is one who associates with them.' It would be noticed that this ancient verse contains some of the ten commandments of the Bible. In spite of these  (noble) Upaniṣadic teachings of Dharma and morality, Prof. Keith ( in 'Religion and Philosophy of the Veda and Upaniṣads ', Vol. II. p. 584, ed. of 1925) makes the pontifical but perverse pronouncement that' the ethical content of the Upaniṣads is negligible and valueless'. It is not necessary to combat here his views. Most scholars would rather follow Schopenhauer (quoted in S. B. E. Vol. I, p. LXI) and Deussen (quoted above in Vol. II. p. 424 ) rather than Keith. The concept of Dharma began to occupy the highest position in the times of the Upaniṣads. The Bṛ. Up. I. 4.14 states there is nothing higher than Dharma.' The Tai[^2610] Āraṇyaka avers 'Dharma is the support (or prop) of the whole world'. The Mahabhārata and Manu repeatedly refer to the high value of Dharma. The Mahābhārata claims that everything concerning the four puruṣārthas is contained in it and that what is not contained in it about them would be found in no other work. In Udyogaparva it is stated 'Dharma is so called because of its character as the sustainer of all beings.' Vanaparva and Manu both declare 'Dharma when violated kills the violator, when preserved it preserves man; therefore, Dharma should not be violated lest Dharma might destroy us.' Vyāsa winds up the Mahābhārata with the solemn appeal 'with arms up-raised I here raise a loud cry, but no one listens to me; from Dharma spring wealth and satisfaction of all desires, why is Dharma not resorted to ? One should not give up Dharma for some desired object, nor through fear nor from greed nor even for the sake of life itself. Dharma is eternal, pleasure and pain are impermanent, the individual self is eternal, but the conditions (under which self works ) are impermanent.'

[^2610]: धर्मो विश्वस्य जगतः प्रतिष्ठा । लोके धर्मिष्ठं प्रजा उपसर्पन्ति । धर्मेण पापमपनुवति धर्मे सर्वे प्रतिष्ठितं तस्माद्धर्म परमं वदन्ति । ते. आ. x.63, महानारायणोप :धर्मे चार्थे च कामेच मोक्षे च भरतर्षभ । यदिहास्ति तदन्यत्र यन्नेहास्ति न तत्क्वचित् । आदिपर्व 62.53 -स्वर्गारोहणपर्व 5.50, vide also आदि 62.23; धारणाद्धर्म इत्याहुर्घमो धारयते प्रजाः । उद्योग 89.67. 137.9, धर्म एव हतो हन्ति धर्मो रक्षति रक्षितः। तस्माद्धर्मो न हन्तव्यो मा नो धर्मो हतोऽवधात् ।। मनु VIII.15. वनपर्व 313.128 is the same, except that the third pada is तस्माद्धर्म न त्यजामि, ऊर्ध्वबाहुविरौम्येष न च कश्चिच्छृणोति माम् । धर्मादर्थश्व कामश्च स किमर्थ न सेव्यते ॥ न जातु कामान्न भयान्न लोभाद्धर्म जह्याज्जीवितस्यापि हेतोः। नित्यो धर्मः सुखदुःखे त्वनित्ये जीवो नित्यो हेतुरस्य त्वनित्यः । स्वर्गारोहणपर्व 5,62-63.

The Mahābhārata passages quoted in n. 18 p. 8 of H. of Dh. Vol. II say 'the three ( Dharma, Artha, Kāma ) are meant for all men, that Dharma is the best of the three, that Artha is middling and Kāma is the lowest and that if there be conflict then Dharma must be followed and the other two abandoned.' This shows that Artha and Kāma were made subservient to Dharma ( the ethical code ) and all three were subservient to the spiritual goal. Our Śāstras do not at all prescribe asceticism for all, but they recognized a scale of values. The Manusmṛti (IV.3 and 15 ) provides' one should accumulate wealth for securing only his needs by actions proper for his station ( varṇa &c) and without harm to his body. One should not desire to acquire wealth by excessive attachment nor by actions condemned by Śāstra nor when be has already enough wealth nor from any kind of person (a sinner or like ), even when he is in straightened circumstances'. Āp. Dh. S. (II. 8. 20 22-23) declares that man should enjoy all such pleasures as are not against Dharma; by doing so he secures both worlds ( this life and life in the next world ). Gautama Dharmasūtra[^2611] IX. 46-47 and Yāj. I. 115 practically say the same thing. In the Bhagavadgitā (VII. 11 ) Kṛṣṇa identifies himself with Kāma that is not in conflict with Dharma. The Arthaśāstra of Kautilya no doubt says (I. 7) that 'Artha is the chief among the three puruṣārthas', but he also provides that one should enjoy a life of pleasures in such a way as not to conflict with Dharma and Artha, that one should not lead a life devoid of pleasures altogether. The Anuśāsanaparva (chap. III. 18-19 ) states that Dharma, Artha and Kāma are the three prizes ( fruits ) of human life, these three should be striven for but in such a way as not to conflict with Dharma'. The Manusmṛti (V. 56 ) declares that eating flesh, drinking intoxicants and sexual intercourse are not sinful in themselves; all beings are naturally inclined to these; but abstention (from these ) leads to great rewards (and therefore Śāstra emphasizes abstention)'. The Rāmāyaṇa ( Araṇyakāṇda 9.30 ) contains a statement similar to Svargarohaṇaparva 5.62.

[^2611]: न पूर्वाह्वमध्यन्दिनापराह्वानफलान कुर्याद्यथाशक्ति धर्मार्थकामेग्यः । तेषु तु धर्मोत्तरः स्यात् । गौ.ध.सू. IX 46–47; धर्मार्थकामान् स्वे काले यथाशक्ति न हापयेत् । या. 1.115; मिताक्षरा comments 'धर्मार्थकामान् स्वोचितकाले यथाशक्ति न परित्यजेत् । यथासम्भवं सेवतेत्यर्थः । : धर्मश्वार्थश्च कामश्चत्रितयं जीविते फलम्। एतत् त्रयमवाप्तष्यमधर्मपरिवर्जितम् । अनुशासनपर्व chap. 111, 18-19, ब्रह्मपुराण 217. 11.

## Meaning of the words 'Santāna-dharma'

When reforms are suggested in these days, conservative people put forward the plea that ours is 'sanātana-dharma'[^2612] and so no changes should be introduced. But the words 'sanātana dharma' do not mean that Dharma always stands still or is immutable; all that those words mean is that our culture is very ancient and has a long tradition behind it but they do not mean that Dharma permits no change. As a matter of fact fundamental changes in conceptions, beliefs and practices have been made from ancient times to the medieval times by means of various devices. Attention may be drawn to a few. Veda was all in all in very ancient times but in the Upaniṣads this was changed, the Muṇdaka I. 1. 5 designating the four Vedas as inferior knowledge ( aparā vidyā) and the knowledge of the immutable _brahman_ as the higher vidyā; in the Chān. Up. VII. 1.4, the four Vedas and several other branches of knowledge are called by Sanatkumāra (whom Narada approached for instruction) mere name (_nāma_). Yajñas were the most important religious practice in the early Vedic period, but the Muṇḍaka Up. I. 2.7 designates them as leaky boats and regards those who hold them as the best thing to be fools. Vide above pp. 1265–72 about changes in the views on anuloma marriages, on the topic of whose food may be partaken even by a brāhmana, the abrogation of many Vedic practices by the doctrine of Kalivarjya ( matters forbidden in Kali age ) &c. Manu, Yāj., Viṣṇudharmasūtra, Viṣṇu and other purāṇas expressly provide that one should not observe but give up what was once Dharma, if it has come to be hateful to the people and if it would end in unhappiness ( vide p. 1270 n. 2071 above). The Śāntiparva[^2613] expressly states that what was _adharma_ (in one age) may become dharma in another and that dharma and adharma are both subjeच्t to the limitations of country and time.

[^2612]: One of the earliest occurrences of the word सनातनधर्म is found in the Khanapur plates of Mādhavavarman (in E, I. Vol. 27, p. 312) edited by Dr. V. V. Mirashi, who assigns it to about the 6th century A. D., in the description of the donee as ' 'यजनयाजनाध्ययनाध्यापनदानप्रतिग्रहाया (य) श्रुतिस्मृतिविहितसनातनधर्मकर्मनिरताय etc.'.'s The land granted was in Returaka ( modern Reṭrem in the Satara District of the Mahārāṣtra State). Another early reference to the phrase सनातनधर्म is in ब्रह्माण्डपुराण II. 33. 37-38 अद्रोहश्चाप्यलोभश्च तपो भूतदया दमः । ब्रह्मचर्य तथा सत्यमनुक्रोशः क्षमा धृतिः। <u> सनातनस्य धर्मस्य मूलमेतदुवाहतम् </u>॥. The words 'सनातनधर्म ' are used in the sense of ancient practice no longer prevalent in Ādiparva 122.18 (Ch, ed.), and in the sense of 'duty recognised long ago ' in रामायण, अयोध्याकाण्ड 19.26, 21, 49 etc.

[^2613]: भवत्यधर्मो धर्मो हि धर्माधर्मादुभावपि । कारणाद्देशकालस्य देशकालः स तादृशः। शान्ति 78.32.

Kāma also was not neglected, as the Kāmasūtra (particularly its chapter on 'nāgaraka-vṛtta ' I. 4) will show. The extensive Nātyaśāstra of Bharata ( containing about 5000 verses ) is a witness to the aesthetic enjoyment of dance, music and drama in ancient India by thousands of ordinary men and women.

Hindu thought on the three goals of human life came to this ' do your duty, do not fall into temptations, perform duties for their own sake ( Gita II, 47, III, 19 ), do unto others as you would be done by (Gitā VI. 32, Anuśāsanaparva 113. 8-9, śānti 259. 20. = Cr. ed. 251. 19), earn wealth but without conflict with dharma and without injury to others and lead a chaste sexual life and enjoy aesthetic pleasures. These summarise the teachings underlying the conceptions of the three puruṣārthas. There was hardly any real pessimism[^2614] in the principal Dharmaśāstra works except perhaps here and there in the Mahābhārata. They consider life to be worth living, provided all actions are informed by the dictates of Dharma. Manu ( XII. 88-89 ) provides that Karma (conduct or actions ) prescribed by the Veda is of two kinds, viz. _pravṛtta_ and _nivṛtta_, the former leading to happiness in this world and to _svarga_, and the latter to niḥśreyasa (mokṣa) and requiring complete absence of all hankerings preceded by realization of _brahma_. The Anuśāsanaparva ( chap. 146. 76-80 ) divides Dharma into pravṛttilakṣana (characterized by persistent activity) and nivṛttilakṣaṇa (characterised by abstention from worldly activities and desires), which latter is to be followed for mokṣa and lays down certain practical and salutary rules viz. one should constantly make gifts according to one's ability, constantly offer sacrifices and perform rites to secure one's prosperity. One should collect wealth following what is right and such wealth obtained righteously should be divided into three parts; one should secure both dharma and artha with one-third of the wealth acquired, one-third should be spent on Kāma (i.e, chaste sexual life and enjoyment of other pleasures not in conflict with dharma ) and one-third he should increase. Manu (VII. 99 and 101) prescribes similar rules for the king.

[^2614]: The Bible was very pessimistic, both Christ and Saint Paul regard the world as evil or at least spoiled. Christ calls upon people not to resist evil ( vide Hobhouse 'Morals in evolution' Vol. II, p. 152).

## Provisions for all ordinary men

The same parvan (Anuśasana chap. 144, 10-25 and 31-39 ) dwells at length upon those actions that lead men to heaven (the phrase "te narāḥ avarga-gāminaḥ' is repeated in each Verse). These provisions are meant for all ordinary people. The Rāmāyaṇa[^2615] quotes a popular verse that man is not condemned to never-ending misery but joy comes to a man even after a hundred years if he be alive.

The 4th Puruṣārtha Mokṣa can be obtained only by a few. It is not a bow which every man or any man can make strung. It was a very difficult path like a razor's edge (Katha Up. III. 14), far more difficult than the path of devotion to a Personal God (Bhagavadgitā XII. 5). The Upaniṣadic doctrine of liberation comes to this that man's nature is really divine, that it is possible for a human being to know and become actually identified with the Godhead, that this should be the ultimate goal of man's life, that this can be achieved by one's own efforts, but the way to achieve this goal is most difficult and requires the aspirant to give up egotism, selfishness and worldly attachments, Besides, there is another difficulty. The conceptions about mokṣa differ in the different schools of thought like Nyāya Sāṅkhya, Vedānta. Even in the Vedānta the conception about Mokṣa on the part of the different ācāryas differs. Some declared that there were four stages in Mukti viz. _Salokya_ (place in Lord's world ), _Sāmipya_ ( proximity ), _Sārūpya_ ( attaining same form as God ) and _Sayujya_ (absorption )[^2616]. These matters cannot be gone into here.

[^2615]: कल्याणी षत गाथेयं लौकिकी प्रतिभाति मे । एति जीवन्तमानन्दो नरं वर्षशतादपि।
               रामायण सुन्दरकाण्ड 34.6, (M L.J. ed.)
The महाभाष्य quotes the third पाद 'एति जीवन्तमानन्द:' in two places, viz, on पा. I. 3,12 and III, 1.67 under वार्तिक 5, Kielhorn's edition, Vol. 1. p. 277 and Vol. II. p. 59.

[^2616]: The तै.सं. v. 7.5.7 bas : एतासामेव देवतानां सायुज्यतां गच्छति. But this is entirely different from the idea of मोक्ष. The words सायुज्य, सारूप्य and सलोकता occur in ऐ.बा. II. 24: सायुज्य and सलोकता accur in वृह उ. I. 3. 22, सलोकवा, सार्ष्टिता (same happiness) and सायुज्य occur in छा. उ. II. 20. 2. The सूतसंहिता (मुक्तिखण्ड chap. 3. 28) speaks of the same four stages of मोक्ष. सायुज्य is derived from सयुद्ध (yoked or joined together ). The words सयुजः वाजान (horses yoked together) occur in ṛg. III. - 30. ll and सयुज । (meaning सयुजो) occurs in Ṛg. I. 164.20. The पुरुषार्थसुधानिधि of सायण (Madras Govt. Oriental Mss. Series, ed. by T.Chandrasekharan, 1955) in its मोक्षस्कन्ध states: मुक्तिर्नानाविधा प्रोक्तासायुज्पादिप्रभेदतः। तत्र सायुज्यरूपायामुक्तःसाक्षाक्तु कारणम् । सम्यग्ज्ञानं न कर्मोक्तं नानयोश्च समुञ्चयः। <u> कर्मणैव </u> हि सिध्यन्ति <u> पुंसामन्याश्च मुक्तयः</u> (chap. 11 Verses 2-3).

Dharma is divided into different classes from different standpoints. One classification is into _śrauta_ ( based on the Vedas ) and _Smārta_ (based on Smṛtis ). There was another and a more comprehensive classification of Dharma into six classes viz. varṇadharma ( duties and rights of varṇas), āśramadharma (rules about the aśramas), varṇāśramadharma ( rules enjoined because the person belongs to a certain class and was also in a certain āśrama (e.g. the rule that a brāhmaṇa brahmacāri should carry a staff of palāśa tree), guṇadharma (rules for one who holds or occupies a certain position, as in the case of a king ), naimittikadharma ( rules that have to be observed only on certain occasions such as bath on an eclipse, expiation for a lapse and lastly sāmānyadharma duties common to all ( such as those described in pp. 10-11 of the H. of Dh. Vol. II), This leads on to the next important characteristic of Hindu culture and society, viz. varṇas and castes.

VI. _Varṇa and caste_. The subject of the origin of varṇa classification, the caste system and the duties, privileges and disabilities of the four varṇas have been dealt with at length in the History of Dharmaśāstra Vol. II. pp. 19–164. It has been shown that the word "varṇa' (colour) has been applied to _Āryas_ and _dāsas_ in the Ṛgveda, that these two (āryas and dāsas ) were opposite camps, that brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas are mentioned in the Ṛgveda, but the word varṇa has not been expressly connected with them. The words Vaiśya and Śūdra do not occur in the Ṛgveda except in the Puruṣasūkta (Ṛg. X. 90. 12 ) but even in that hymn the word' varṇa' is not employed with reference to them. That hymn is held to be comparatively a late one by most modern scholars. It may be conceded that at the time when the Puruṣasūkta was composed the community was divided into four groups viz brāhmaṇas (thinkers, learned men, priests ) kṣatriyas (rulers and warriors), vaiśyas (common people following agriculture and crafts ) and śūdras ( those that did menial work). Such a division of people into four groups is not unnatural and is found in many countries even now. In England there are aristocratic families, there is the middle class and the workers in factories &c. They are not necessarily based on birth alone, though largely so based. It has been shown above (p. 1265 ) that intermarriages between brāhmaṇas and the other varṇas were allowed up to the time of the Yājñvalkya Smṛti which expresses its dissent from its predecessors and prohibits a person of the three upper classes from marrying a śūdra woman. There is no evidence to show that intermarriage or interdining among the four varṇas was prohibited in the Vedic age.

## No evidence of prohibition of marriage among four varṇas

In the Vāj. 8. 30. 6-13, Kathaka S. XVII. 13, Tai, Br, III, 4, 2-3 numerous artisans and craftsmen such as takṣan, rathakāra, kulāla, karmāra, niṣāda, sūta and others are mentioned but it is extremely doubtful whether they had become petrified caetes at the period of these works. Rathakāra and karmāra and sūta are mentioned in Atharvaveda III. 5. 6-7. It is probable that by the time of the Chan. Up. V. 10.7 Cāṇdālas had become untouchables (like dogs and hogs ) and Paulkasa seems to be equated with Cāṇdāla in Br. Up. IV.3.22. Even in the times of Yājñavalkya and Parāśara (2nd to 6th century A.D.) a brāhmaṇa was permitted to take food at the house of such śūdras as his _dāsa_, cowherd, barber, a tenant of his land on the rent of half share of crops ( vide above p. 1266 ). The varṇas were only four, there was no fifth varṇa (Manu X, 4 and Anuśāsanaparva, chap. 48. 30), though in modern time untouchables are often spoken of as _pañcamas_ ( against Smṛti usage ). The word _jāti_ in the sense of caste hardly ever occurs in Vedic literature but it occurs in the Nirukta ( XII. 13 ) and in Pāṇini (V. 4. 9 ), who explains 'brāhmaṇajātiya' as meaning one who is a brāhmaṇa by caste'. Sometimes, Jāti and Varṇa are differentiated in Smṛtis (Yāj. II. 69, 260 ), but from ancient times the word _Jāti_ is confounded with the word _Varṇa_. Manu (X. 31 ) uses the word 'Varṇa' in the sense of mixed castes; conversely, the word Jāti is employed in the sense of 'Varṇa ' in Manu ( VIII, 177, IX. 85-86, X. 41 ).

A sort of caste system existed in several countries such as Persia, Rome and Japan, but it disappeared and had never attained the complexity of the Indian Caste system.

There are now several thousand castes and sub-castes in India. How they arose is, according to the present author, an insoluble problem. Sherring in 'Hindu Tribes and Castes' (1881, vol. III, p. 231 ) held that caste was an invention (of the brāhmaṇas ). How such a huge system could be invented and imposed upon millions of people by a small minority without physical or political power never occurred to the prejudiced Christian missionary of the third quarter of the 19th century.

It is well-known that at least from the 6th century B.C. onwards India was being invaded by Persians, Kambojas[^2617], Greeks, Scythians ( generally held to be the same as Śakas), and people like Pāradas, Pahlavas, Cinas, Kirātas, Daradas (Dards ) and Khaśas emigrated into India. Manu ( X, 43-44 ), after mentioning these and Paunḍrakas, Oḍras ( Orissa ), Draviḍas, asserts that these were originally Kṣatriyas but had become Śūdras because the sacraments like Upanayana had ceased among them and because they lost contact with brāhmaṇas. Manu X. 45 shows that in his day there were mixed castes that spoke mleccha tongues and Arya languages but were treated as dasyus ( śūdras). Gautama-dharmasūtra (IV. 14-17 ), Manu X. 5-40, Yāj. I, 91-95 and many other works dilate upon the rise of mixed castes from the marriages or unions of men and women of different varṇas and declare how further castes and sub-castes arise from the marriages and unions of men and women belonging to different classes and castes. This was called _Varnasaṇkara or simply _saṇkara_, about which Arjuna expressed concern ( Gitā I. 41-42) and against which the Bhagavad-gitā (111. 24-25 ) inveighs bitterly. It was stated by Gautama (Dh, S. VIII, 3) that the prosperity ( of the castes and sub-castes ), protection and the non-mixture (of varṇas ) depend on the king and learned brāhmaṇas. The Nasik Inscription of king Siri Pulumāyi (E. I. Vol. VIII. p. 60 about 130 A. D.) extols the king as having prevented the intermingling of varṇas (Varṇasaṇkara).

The mixture of castes (varṇasaṇkara)[^2618] had gone so far even in the early ages that in the Vanaparva (180, 31-33 ) Yudhiṣthira is made to say that 'It is difficult to ascertain the caste of a person on account of the confusing mixture of Varṇas;all men raise progeny from all sorts of women; therefore, those who are wise regard character as the principal and desirable matter' (q. in H. of Dh. vol. II. p. 61 n. 149).

[^2617]: Atri-smṛti VII. 2 (in prose, Ānan, collection ) mentions some of these foreign tribes and peoples. Vide Anuśāsanaparva 33. 21-23 (Śakā yavana-kāmbojāḥ... kṣatriyajātayaḥ, vr̥ṣalatvam parigatā brāhmaṇānām adarśanāt &c.) and Anuśāsana 35. 17–18 also. Śaka and Yavana are included among Śūdras by the Mahābhāṣya on Pāṇini II. 4. 10 (q. in H. of Dh. Vol. II. p. 92. n. 200 ). Aśoka in his Rock Edicts V, and XIII refers to Yonas, Yonarāja and Kāmbojas as people on the borders of his empire.

A. M. T. Jackson says in 'Indian Antiquary' for 1910 p. 77' the attractive power of Hindu civilization which has enabled it to assimilate and absorb into itself every foreign invader except the Moslem and European..,India civilized the nomads of Central Asia, so that wild Turkman tribes have been transformed into some of the most famous Rajput royal races.'

[^2618]: Vide H. of Dh, Vol. II pp. 59-61 on Varṇasaṇkara.

## Mixture of varṇas had reached peak in Mahābhārata.

The original scheme of varṇas was natural and based on the work that men put in for the community as a whole. It was not based on birth. The ideas underlying the original varṇa system made the nearest approach towards a society in which there was no attempt to secure a competitive equality but in which the interest of all groups were regarded as identical. In Vedic times there were only classes and pot castes in the modern sense. Even in the smṛtis when many castes had arisen the greatest emphasis was laid on duties rather than on privileges and on high moral character and the value of the effort made by a man. It is therefore stated in the Gitā ( IV. 13 ) that the system of four varṇas was created on the basis of quality (or on the basis of _sattva_, _rajas_ and _tamas_ ) and actions and (in XVIII. 42-44 ) it specifies the qualities and actions required in the four varṇas as an ideal, viz. serenity of mind, self-control, austerity, purity, forbearance, straightforwardness, wisdom ( spiritual knowledge ), knowledge (of all kinds ), faith (in God ) these are the natural actions ( duties ) for a brāhmaṇa; bravery, fury, energy, steadiness, capability, not running away in battle, charity and rulership these are duties of a kṣatriya; agriculture, keeping herds of Cows (and cattle ), trade and commerce-these are the natural duties of the Vaibya; work of the nature of service is the natural duty of the Śūdra. These words of Gitā cannot be used for supporting the present scheme of thousands of castes and sub-castes of water-tight character. If birth had been regarded as the sole or principal basis, the words in the Gita[^2619] (IV.13 ) should have been,'Jāti-karmavibhāgaśaḥ' ('or janma-karma') and not 'Guṇakarma'.

[^2619]: It is remarkable that the late Lokamānya Tilak advocated about four months before his death (in the issue of the 'Kesari' of 16th March 1920) that anyone who spent his life in Indian freedom struggle must be treated as a brāhmaṇa to whatever caste or sub-caste-he might have belonged by birth, that caste should not be treated as a matter of birth but that we must begin to treat it as dependent on qualities and actions and he relies on our śāstras and quotes in support a Pali verse from the Suttanipāta : 'न जच्चा बसलो होति न जच्चा होति ब्राह्मणो । कम्मणा बसलो होति कम्मणा होति बाह्मणो.''a man does not become a Vṛṣala, that is, Śūdra by caste (or birth) nor does be become a brāhmaṇa by birth; a man becomes a vṛṣala or a brāhmaṇa by his actions' (compare Mahāvagga, vāseṭthasutta, verse 57 in SBE Vol. X part 2 p. 115 ). There is great misunderstanding about his opposition to those reformers who did not care for or engage in political agitation but spent their energies and time in inveighing against some social evils. He wanted to remove the evil of grinding poverty and political bondage of India due to the colonial policy of Britain for over 150 years and therefore be stressed the point that everyone must join in the fight for freedom and did not like the idea of some very intellectual men spending time and energy in crying themselves hoarse for only social reform. He thought that when India became free from the incubus of foreign rule, many social reforms would be introduced in no time, Events have shown that he was right, and the social reformers who maligned him were wrong. Our Constitution abolished untouchability at one stroke (Article 17 ), legislation has made a provision that to treat a man as untouchable in public is punishable (vide Act XX11 of 1955 sections 3 and 4 ), legislation has removed all ban against intercaste marriages and several other reforms have been brought about. Vide 'Social Legislation and its role in Social Welfare' published in 1956 on behalf of the Planning Commission. For Tilak's article, vide 'लोकमान्य टिळकांचे केसरींतील लेख भाग ३, पृष्ठे ४५३-५८1. British people were cautious and were generally opposed to progressive social reforms in Hindu Society. The High Courts administered Hindu Law as contained in the medieval digests (nibandhas) like the Dāyabhāga, the Mitakṣarā and the Vyavahāramayūkha and not the law found in ancient smṛtis, which allowed anuloma marriages; vide H. of Dh, vol. II pp. 448-452 and "A Century of Social reform" by S. Natarajan, Asia Publishing House, Bombay, particularly pp. 126–173.

It would be noticed that out of the nine _karmāṇi_ specified as natural to brāhmaṇas most are moral and spiritual and no emphasis is laid on the element of birth. At the time of the Mahābhārata there must have been a great deal of ferment, some revolt and criticism about the petrified caste system. The epic frequently refers to the theme of varṇas and jātis. Vide for example, Vanaparva (chapter 180), Virātaparva 50. 4-7, Udyoga 23. 26, 40, 25-29, śānti 188. 10-14, Anuśāsana 143. A few passages may be got out here. Śānti 188. 10 says there is no (real) distinction between the varṇas, (since ) the whole world is of Brahmā, since it was formerly created by Brahmā, and has had the system of varṇas on account of the various actions (of men)'; Śānti ( 189, 4 and 8) avers 'that man is known as brāhmana in whom are seen truthfulness, generosity, absence of hate, absence of wickedness, shame (restraint for avoiding wrong-doing), compassion and a life of austerity; if these signs are observed in a śūdra and are not found in a brāhmaṇa, then the śūdra is not a śūdra ( should not be treated as a śūdra ) and the brāhmaṇa is not a brāhmaṇa. A similar passage occurs in Vanaparva 216. 14-15 ( quoted above in note 1640 pp. 1005-6 and compared to Dhammapada 393, translated on p. 1005). When the wrangles between Vaiṣṇavas and others were at their highest the Bhagavatapurāṇa (VII. 9. 10) avers that a cāndala who is a devotee of Viṣṇu is superior to a brāhmaṇa who is not a devotee of Viṣṇū. Apart from the specific qualities required to be possessed by the members of each of the four varṇas, all Dharmaśāstra works attach the highest importance to certain moral qualities and enjoin them on all men. Manu X. 63, Yāj. I. 22, Gaut. Dh. S. VII). 23-25, Matsya 52. 1-10 (quoted above on p. 1023 n. 1652) prescribe for all Varṇas a brief code of morals, such as ahimsa, truthfulness, non stealing (i.e, no wrongful taking of another's property ), purity and restraint of the senses. The Mitakṣarā on Yāj. I. 22 explains that the word 'sarveṣām 'therein states that these moral qualities if practised are the means of Dharma for all men from brāhmaṇas to cāṇdālas. Vide H. of Dh. Vol. II pp. 10–11 for different enumerations of dharmas common to all men. The Manusmṛti (1.1) begins by saying that the great sages requested Manu to expound the dharmas of all varṇas and of the intermediate castes. This ( viz. the Dharmas of varṇas, intermediate castes and āśramas ) is the principal topic in most of the smṛtis.

A very high ideal was placed before brāhmaṇas ( vide above pp 936-938). They were to study the Veda and its subsidiary lores as a duty (to be discharged ), were to perform sacrifices and make gifts also and their proper means of livelihood were only three viz, teaching the Veda and Śāstras, officiating as priests in sacrifices and receiving religious and other gifts. How arduous learning the Veda was will be clear when it is remembered that a brāhmaṇa who was to be regarded as a very learned one had to memorize one Veda at least. Supposing he was a student of the Ṛgveda he had to commit to memory the ten thousand and odd verses of the Ṛgveda, also its _pada-pāṭha_, its kramapāṭha, the Brāhmaṇa text (generally the Aitareya ), the six Vedāṅgas ( auxiliary works) viz. the Kalpasūtra ( of Āśvalāyana generally ), Vyākaraṇa ( the Grammar of Pāṇini in about four thousand sūtras ), the Nirukta ( in at least 12 chapters ), metrics, Śikṣā ( Phonetics ) and Jyotiṣa. The first three of these six Vedāṅgas are rather longish treatises and abstruse. These extensive texts were generally committed to memory without understanding the meaning and so entailed very great strain on the mind and memory. There were thousands of such brāhmaṇas in India up to the beginning of this century, and even now there are still hundreds of such men. They were to teach the Veda without demanding any fee ( demanding a fee to teach Veda was and is regarded as sinful even to this day). They were allowed to receive a fee if the pupil or somebody on his behalf paid something at the end of studenthood. Not only did they transmit the Veda free, but there were in the present author's youth in Koṅkaṇa and Mahārāṣtra many Vaidik brāhmaṇas who gave free board and lodging to several pupils (or arranged to feed them by turns at the houses of brāhmaṇa families in the village or town). All this has now almost stopped owing to rationing during the world wars and present high prices. So teaching hardly brought any regular and substantial amount of money ( vide H. of Dh. Vol. II. pp. 108-110 ). As regards officiating as priests, that was a precarious and fitful source of income. Besides, in Ṛg. times at least, the scion of a royal family could be a _purohita_ i.e. a priest ( vide H. of Dh. Vol. II. p. 109). It should be remembered that all brāhmaṇas were not priests; they could be so if they chose and if they were learned. Further, many learned brāhmaṇas refuse even now to act as priests in śrāddhas for pitr̥s ( at least for three years after the man's death ). Pāṇini (V.2.71 ) provides for the formation of the word 'Brāhmaṇaka' meaning a province or country where 'brāhmaṇas followed the profession of arms' and Kautilya (IX. 2 ) also refers to armies of brāhmaṇās, kṣatriyas &c. The third source specially permitted to brāhmaṇas was the privilege of receiving religious gifts from a worthy or unblemished person ( vide H. of Dh. Vol. II pp. 110, 11). Brāhmaṇas could follow other occupations in distress, but even then there were great restrictions imposed on them by Śāstras even when they took to other means of livelihood ( vide H. of Dh. Vol. II pp. 118-132)[^2620]. The ideal set before brāhmaṇas was one of poverty, of plain living and high thinking, of forsaking a very active pursuit of wealth, of insisting on the necessity and high value to themselves and the Aryan society of studying, preserving, propagating and augmenting the ancient literature and culture.

[^2620]: It was, for example, provided by Vasiṣṭha (II. 27) and Manu X. 92 that a brāhmaṇa becomes a śūdra by selling milk for three days. In the present author's boyhood some poor brāhmaṇas had begun to sell milk and the result was that they were very much looked down upon by the villagers. There would be the temptation to add water to the milk to gain money.

## Ancient ideal set before brāhmaṇas

Kings, rich persons and even ordinary men made gifts of lands and houses to learned brāhmaṇas ( which were deemed the most meritorious gifts )[^2621]. The present author saw in his boyhood very learned Vaidika brāhmaṇas themselves ploughing their own lands, while repeating inaudibly the Veda (i.e. revising it, as otherwise it might slip from their memory ) and know a middle class Vaidika brāhmaṇa family that for seven generations had taught Veda to a number of pupils and provided them with free board and lodging; (out of these seven the present author personally know three generations, the last of whom stopped a few years ago the Vaidika school owing to present high prices of food, decrease in gifts due to the increasing poverty of the people round about and their unconcern for Vedic studies ). Even in the times of the early Upaniṣads, the brāhmaṇa's first duty was to learn and teach the Veda and to take all knowledge for his province. Ajātaśatru, king of Kāsi, exclaimed, when the brāhmaṇa Bālāki Gārgya approached him for knowledge of _brahman_, this is against the natural usual course that a brāhmaṇa should approach a kṣatriya to learn about brahman' (Bṛ. Up. II, 1. 15). That indicates that many brāhmaṇas must have endeavoured to act up to the old ideal of learning in olden times. They became the custodians of the vast literature that had accumulated and was growing every day and were expected to preserve that literature and propagate it. Though every brāhmaṇa could not have lived up to the high ideals set up for brāhmaṇas, a very large number must have made as near an approach to the ideal as possible. It was the greatness of these latter that led to the glorification of the whole class. In most communities there is a group of the _elite_, which represents the ideals of the whole community, its essential tendencies and acts up to the ideals. Learning, great moral and spiritual attainments among individuals are rather elusive and impalpable, while birth in & certain family is a very obvious thing. Most people in ancient and medieval times followed the occupation of their forefathers. The kingly office was highly eulogised by Manu ( VIII. 4-8), who propounded the theory that the king represented in his person eight deities ( Indra, Agni, Varuṇa, the Sun, the Moon, Kubera, Yama and Vāyu) and that the king was a great divinity in human form. The office of the king also was hereditary.

[^2621]: Vide H. of Dh. Vol. II p. 113 n 241 for large gifts to brāhmaṇas, in the early centuries of the Christian era, of villages, cows and marriage expenses.

Except in a few cases the brāhmaṇas were never rulers. It was the kṣatriyas and śūdras that were rulers. Therefore, a generalisation was made that birth in a particular group or family was a more or less sure indication of the possession of certain qualities generally associated with the members of that group or family. The brāhmaṇas were teachers with no salary, officiated as priests when called and were given fees, but there was no assurance of a continuous and certain payment. They had no church organization[^2622] ( such as Archbishops, bishops, priests, deacons in the Anglican Church ) and monasteries for monks among Buddhists and in the Christian Church. The brāhmaṇas were not monks but householders who had to maintain a family and bring up children and to make their sons learned and of high moral and spiritual worth. There is no example in the whole world of a small minority of the population of a country, that had no military strength behind it, being revered for at least thirty centuries without any serious challenge not only by the common people but by nobles and kings. What was the basis of the reverence shown to brāhmaṇas as a class for at least three thousand years? They were believed to be religious, moral and spiritual leaders and the possessors and representatives of an idealistic culture ('ideational' in the language of Prof. Sorokin ). The secret of the power of and regard for brāhmaṇas had been the fact that as a class they performed well three of their appointed tasks of study, teaching and comparative renunciation ( in spite of the failings of some individual brāhmaṇas ). The brāhmaṇas had no army to support them and they could not, by devoting themselves to physical sciences, find new sources of income or well-being for themselves or for the whole community.

Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru in his Autobiography (p. 432 ) pays in passing a tribute to the Brāhmaṇa ideal as follows. 'But the West also brings an antidote to the evils of this cut-throat civilization - the principles of socialism, co-operation and service to the community for the common good. This is not so unlike the old Brahmin ideal of service etc.' The ancient Indian culture exalted the mind and soul over the body and hence arose an extra-ordinary development of asceticism.

[^2622]: The income of the See of the Archbishop of Canterbury, it is understood, has been fifteen thousand pounds a year ( vide Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church, ed. by F. L. Cross, London 1957, p. 232). Vide H, of Dh. Vol. II p. 138 for a sample of the actions of Popes and eulogies of the Nordic race by Spengler and others.

## Abolition of caste system

If in modern times the caste system has broken down and has become harmful and unpopular among all people, it may be scrapped and discarded ( vide above p. 1270 note 2071 for provisions about this ). But such a huge and all-pervading system cannot be destroyed in a short time nor by legislation, What those who desire to destroy altogether the caste system want is not clear. Do they want complete westernization of the whole of India? To the present author this appears to be not only very difficult but almost impossible. Legislation may help a little, but it cannot eradicate within the foreseeable future the mental attitudes and outlook of millions of people. Cases have been reported where village _kunbis_ and craftsmen threatened to beat untouchables that wanted to draw water from a village well in the presence of a magistrate. If this campaign against the whole caste system is carried on with force, there are sure to be widespread riots and disorders and the Independence of the country attained after two centuries of colonial rule may be jeopardized. Two matters must be carefully considered and strenuously worked for. Government must see to it that nationalism, the emotion of being one people, in spite of differences in some respects, must be instilled from childhood and among the masses. For that purpose free and compulsory education for all children on national lines must be achieved as quickly as possible. Merely inveighing against casteism by leaders would not do, when people often suspect them as guilty of other 'isms' (such as nepotism ). Universal primary and secondary education, growing number of inter-caste marriages, a growing sense of solidarity as to essentials of culture ( though petty differences may exist) would be the first requisites in any scheme of the removal of castes, Besides, very large numbers of self-sacrificing men, of high moral character and devotion to duty would be required for eradicating the evils of the decayed caste system. Another matter also must be very carefully considered. What is going to be substituted in place of the old caste system? People are afraid that a new caste system of ministers, bureaucrats, captains of industry, men in power and workers is going to be substituted without the saving grace of the ancient caste system.

It should not be forgotten that high spiritual life and mokṣa were not denied to the śūdra. It is true that the Purvamimāmsā denied to the śūdra the right to study the Veda and to perform Vedic sacrifices ( VI, I. 26 ). But even in those ancient times one sage, Bādari, advocated that the śūdra could study the Veda and perform Vedic sacrifices (P. M. S. VI. 1. 27). Besides, it should be noted that the śūdra was not at all debarred from a spiritual life and could secure mokṣa by studying the Mahābhārata ( which contains thousands of verses on Mokṣa), which Vyasa compassionately composed for the benefit of women and śūdras and which calls itself (in Adiparva chap. 62. 23 ) Dharmaśāstra, Arthaśāstra and Mokṣaśāstra, as declared by the Bhāgavatapurāṇa I. 4. 25. All that was decided was that a śūdra could not secure Mokṣa by the study of Veda. Śaṅkarācārya on V.S. I. 3. 38 points out that śūdras like Vidura (Ādiparva 63. 96-97 and 114, 106. 24-28, Udyogaparva 41.5 ) and Dharma-vyādha ( Vanaparva 207 ) possesed knowledge of _brahmavidyā_ and that it is impossible to say that they were not able to secure Mokṣa. Vide above pp. 921-2% and note 1468a for the discussion of the relevant passages. It is noteworthy that even in early Vedic times the Rathakāra (a caste not belonging to any of the three higher classes ) was allowed to set up Vedic fires and could repeat certain Vedic mantras for that purpose and the Niṣāda ( also not belonging to any of the three varṇas, but being a śūdra ) was allowed to perform an _iṣti_ to Rudra with Vedic mantras. Vide pp. 1290-91 (for Rathakāra ) and pp. 1295-96 ( for Niṣāda ) above. These facts show that Vedic sacrifices had penetrated into certain śūdra castes long before the sūtras and smr̥tis. The Bhāgavatapurāṇa (VII. 9.10) was prepared to hold that a cāṇdāla (by birth ) if he becomes a devotee of Viṣṇu was superior to a brāhmaṇa who was not such a devotee.

The disappearance of the caste system, when it comes about, will not at all imply the disappearance or destruction of all that for which Hinduism has stood up during several millennia.

We should not be constantly harping on the caste system as the only or most basic cause of our downfall. The Moslems have no caste system and yet most of the Moslem countries in the world have been backward and under the thumb of Western powers. China, Japan and the countries in S. E. Asia had hardly anything like the caste system of our country, but the first two about a hundred years ago were very backward and many of the countries in S. E. Asia were within the Colonial Empire of Holland, a small country the population of which is even now only about eleven millions.

## Downfall due to lack of certain virtues

Since 1818 when the British acquired the Deccan, for about 130 years what little royal power remained in India was distributed among about 600 princely States ruled by kṣatriyas and others and hardly a dozen brāhmaṇa States existed among those 600. What little trade and commerce existed or was allowed by the British to Indians was in the hands of Parsis, Bhatias, Banias, Marvadis, Jains and Lingayats and the brāhmaṇas had very little share in trade and commerce. It was the brāhmaṇa politicians like Tilak that insisted on _Swadeshi_. Agriculture, money lending and Zamindari were mostly in the hands of non-brāhmaṇas except in Bengal and contiguous territories where the Zamindari system supported by Lord Cornwallis prevailed. Our downfall for centuries was due to lack of certain virtues and idealogies among all our people, high or low. Let us, therefore, all Indians, stop blaming the caste system for our downfall and try to eradicate it or lessen its evils and cultivate virtues like duty for duty's sake, high endeavour, high moral character, nationalism, freedom and justice.

VI. Āśramas : Another important characteristic of our culture is the system of Āśramas, which have been in existence for certainly several centuries before the Christian era. The word Āśrama does not occur in the Vedic Samhitās or Brāhmaṇas, In Sv. Up. VI. 21 oocurs the word ' atyāśramibhyaḥ'( to the best of ascetics ) which indicates that the word ' āśrama' had then been known. A generic word comprehending several matters is coined long after the several words for the component parts have been current for centuries. The word śrāddha doos not occur in any ancient Vedic passages, though the Piṇdapitr̥yajña (performed by an _agnihotrin_ on each Amāvāsyā), the Mahāpitr̥yajña (performed in the cāturmāsya rite Sākamedha) and the Aṣtaka rites ( all of which are rites in honour of pitr̥s) were known in early Vedic literature ( vide H. of Dh. VOL IV. pp. 349–50 ). Similarly, some of the āśramas were certainly known from the times of the Ṛgveda, The Āśramas[^2623] long before the time of the sūtra literature at least have been four viz. brahmacarya ( stage of studenthood), gārhasthya (householder stage ), vānaprasthya ( stage of forest hermit) or vaikhānasa (Gaut. III, 2 ), Sannyāsa (stage of ascetic life ) or Mauna or Pārivrājya or Pravrajyā or Bhikṣu ( Gaut. III, 2 ). Āśramas have been dealt with in H. of Dh. VOL II pp. 416-426, brahmacarya in H. of Dh. Vol. II pp. 349-382, forest hermit (in pp. 919–929 ) and sannyāsa in pp.930-975 (of the same volume ).

[^2623]: चत्वार आश्रमा गार्हस्थ्यमाचार्यकुलं मौनं वानप्रस्थ्यमिति । आप. घ. सू. II.9.21.1 quoted by शङ्कराचार्य in भाष्य on V. S. III. 1..47.

The span of human life is said to be one hundred years or winters or autumns from the times of the Ṛgveda (Ṛg. VI. 4, 8; 10.7, 12, 6, 17. 15, 24. 10 in all these hundred winters ), VII, 101. 6, X. 161. 3 and 4 (autumns ). As no one could say how long one might live it is not to be supposed that each stage was of 25 years; all that is meant is that a man may, if he lives long, pass through the four stages. The word brahmacāri occurs in Ṛg. X. 109.9 and Tai, 8. VI. 3. 10.5 and brahmacarya in Tai. S. VI. 3, 10.5 and Tai, Br. III, 10. 11. In Ṛg. VI. 53. 2 occurs the word 'gṛhapati' (lord of the house ) meaning the same thing as gṛhastha. Indra is said to be the friend of munis (in Ṛg. VIII. 17. 14 ) and yatis are said to have praised Indra ( Ṛg. VIII 6. 18). The Katha Up. IV. 15 saying that the self of the _Muni_ ( knowing the reality) becomes one with the Supreme Self indicates that the reference is to a Sannyāsin who had realized the Supreme Spirit. The Br. Up. IV. 4. 22 saying that the Great Self is the Lord of the universe, that brāhmaṇas seek to know him by study of the Veda, by sacrifices and gifts, by austerities (_tapas_) and by fasting and that, after realizing that Supreme Self the man becomes a muni, that desiring this stage only the wandering (ascetics ) leave home ( take to that stage ). Here those engaged in tapas are placed at an earlier stage than pravrajyā. Therefore, the Ch. Up. II. 23. 1, speaking about three branches of Dharma, should be taken as mentioning the three āśramas and the words 'one who is firmly established in _brahman_ obtains immortality' should be taken as referring to the 4th Āśrama. As pointed out in H. of Dh. Vol. II. pp. 928–929 most of the rules laid down for forest hermits are the same as those for the sannyāsin and there was difference between the two in a few matters only. From Br. Up. II. 4.1 ff. and IV, 5. 2 ff. (where the word _pravrajiṣyan_ is used) for _udyāsyan_ (in II. 4. 1) it follows that Yajñavalkya became a sannyāsin (or parivrājaka) immediately after leaving the householder's life. Later on in the _Kalivarjya_ acts the stage of being a forest hermit is included. Vide H. of Db. Vol. II, p. 420 n. 999 on Chān. Up. II. 23.1. The stage of householder ( gṛhastha) was highly praised. Vide H. of Dh. Vol. II pp. 424-425, 640-41, Vol. V. pp. 1026-27.

## High position of sannyāsins due to virtues

The stage of sannyāsa or yati was highly honoured, because it was deemed to lead to mokṣa. The result was that many persons quite unfit to lead the life prescribed for a real sannyāsin only entered the order and possessed all the outward signs of that stage such as wearing ochre-coloured garments, shaving the head, carrying three staffs and a water jar. They are condemned in the Mahābhārata, śāntiparva 308. 47 (cr. ed. = 320. 47 Ch. ed.) quoted in H. of Dh. Vol. II p. 936 n 2151b and above p. 1369 n. 2241 ). Yāj. III 58 provides that the sannyāsin should be good to all beings, quiescent, have three daṇḍas and a water jar and should enter a village for begging alms. Some interpreted the word _tridaṇḍi_ as meaning carrying three staffs', while others like Manu XII. 10 and Daksa VII, 30 provide that a person is called tridaṇḍı who observes threefold restraint, viz, of speech, mind and body. The sannyāsin was so highly esteemed that for deciding doubtful points of dharma a single ascetic was allowed to do the work of a pariṣad and declare the proper decision (vide H, of Dh. Vol. II p. 969). Similarly, great emphasis was laid on inviting a Yati at a śrāddha dinner (vide H. of Dh. Vol. IV pp. 388, 399). The Bṛhaj-jātaka ( chapter 15 ) deals with the question about the horoscopic indications for different kinds of ascetics being born on the conjunction of four or more powerful planets in the same sign of the zodiac in the horoscope and adds that according as Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, the Moon, Venus, Saturn, or the Sun is the most powerful of the four or more planets in one sign in a horoscope, the person whose nativity it is becomes respectively an ascetic of the types of Bauddha, Ājivika[^2624], a bhikṣu ( i.e. vedic ascetic), Vṛddha (a Kāpālika), a caraka, a nirgrantha (a Jain ascetic ) or one subsisting on forest produce, fruits, roots &c.[^2625] This shows that long before Varāhamihira (6th century A. D.) so many kinds of ascetics flourished or were common in India.

The _varṇa_ system classified the whole community and was addressed to people in the mass; the Āśrama theory addresses itself to the individuals in a community and maps out for them how they should order their lives and what preparations are required for the several goals of human life. Deussen in the 'Philosophy of the Upaniṣads' (English translation of 1906, p. 397 ) says about the Āśrama theory that 'the entire history of mankind does not produce much that approaches in grandeur to this thought.'

[^2624]: The ājīvikas were an ancient class of monks. They are mentioned in Aśoka's 7th Pillar Edict (E. I. Vol. II, pp. 270, 272 ) Dasaratha, grandson of Emperor Aśoka, made grants of caves to Ājivika monks. Vide C. I. I. Vol. I. p. 181. The founder of the order was Gośāla, once a disciple of Mahāvira, who later left him. The Vāyupuraṇa (62.285 ) refers to them as 'adhārmika'. Vide 'History and the doctrines of the Ājīvikas' by Prof. A. _L. Basham (Luzac and Co. 1951). This is an exhaustive work on the Ājīvikas.

[^2625]: एकस्यैश्चतुरादिभिर्बलयुतैर्जाताः पृथवीर्यगैः शाक्याजीविकभिक्षुवृद्धचरका निर्ग्रन्थवन्याशनाः । माहेयज्ञगुरुक्षपाकरसितप्राभाकरीनैः क्रमात् प्रवज्या पलिभिः समाः परजितैस्तत्त्वामिभिः प्रच्युतिः ॥ वृहज्जातक 15.1. उत्पल  quotes Prākrit verses on the same subject from Vaṅkālakācārya and several Āryās in Sanskrit from Satyācārya, a predecessor of Vārāha.

VII. The doctrine of Karma and Punarjanma (transmigration or metempsychosis ).

This is one of the most fundamental doctrines of the Hindu system of religion and philosophy and is unique in its own way, particularly in its long continuity and immense early literature. It has been dealt with above in a separate and extensive chapter ( XXXV pp. 1530 ff). It is not, therefore, necessary to say anything more here.

VIII. Another important doctrine is that of _ahiṁsā_. So far as the Upaniṣads, Mahābhārata, Dharmaśāstras and Purāṇas are concerned the subject of _ahiṁsā_ has been dealt with above in pp. 944-947 and in Vol. II, p. 30. A few matters are briefly mentioned here. The words _kratu_ and _yajña_ occur hundreds of times in the Ṛgveda. The difference sometimes made is this that the word _yajña_ is very general (including the five daily religious duties laid down in Manu III. 70), while _kratu_ is confined to solemn Vedic sacrifices like Somayāga. Pānini mentions the two separately (IV.3.68 ) and the Gitā IX, 16 (ahaṁ kraturaham yajñaḥ ) also does the same. Animals were offered in some of these, though not in all. Gradually it came to be thought even in the Ṛgveda times that worshipping Agni with fuel sticks or with an oblation of cooked food or ghee or with Veda study or obeisances or with a solemn sacrifice is on the same level and the worshipper is rewarded with swift horses (dashing against enemies ) and with highest glory and no trouble whether divine or due to men, reaches him (Ṛg. VIII. 19. 5-6). Some Brāhmaṇa texts are couched in the same strain. The Ait.[^2626] Br. (VI. 9 ) remarks 'he who offers a cake performs a sacrifice equal to the offering of all sacrificial animals'. The Tai. Br. provides that the forest sacrificial animals, after a firebrand is carried around them, are let off for the sake of ahiṁsā. Dr. A. Schweitzer in his 'Indian thought and its development' (tr. into English by Mrs. Russell, 1936) tries hard to establish a contrast between the attitude of what he calls 'world and life negation' in Hindu thought and 'world and life affirmation characteristic of Christianity and as a side issue remarks (on p. 80 ) that 'the ahiṁsā commandment does not arise from a feeling of compassion but from a feeling of keeping, a person undefiled'. The learned author ignores several things; firstly,[^2627] not a word is said about purity (śauca) in the Chandogya and other passages about ahiṁsā. Secondly, the injunction about not giving pain to any being (in Chān. Up.) is immediately preceded by the words 'having concentrated all his senses on the Self'. That shows that one who knows and has come to realize that all is _brahma_ should give no pain to others as all those also are brahma and not on the ground of purity or defilement.

[^2626]:  सर्वेषां वा एष पशूनां मेधेन यजते यः पुरोडाशेन यजते। ऐ.ब्रा. VI.93 पर्यग्निकृतानारण्यानुत्सुजन्त्यहिंसायै। ते. प्रा. III. 9.3.3 (सायण explains स च परित्थागो हिंसाराहित्याय सम्पद्यते).

[^2627]: This is not the place to give a lengthy reply to Dr. Schweitzer's remarks. Dr, Schweitzer's compliment to Christ, Christianity and the West was criticized by Dr. Radhakrisnan in Eastern Religion and Western thought. (1939 pp. 76-110 ) and by Shri D. S. Sharma in 'Renaissance of Hinduism' pp. 618-634. On p. 2 Dr. Schweitzer boldly asserts that world and life affirmation unceasingly urges men to serve their fellows, society, the nation, mankind and indeed all that lives with their utmost will &c. One should like to know the Biblical passages where all this grand thought is explicitly stated. On p. 4 he contradicts himself when he says 'Christianity also brought European thought into relation with world and life negation.' The two great commandments of Jesus are first 'to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul' and the second is 'thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself'( vide Matthew 22.37 and 39 and Mark 12. 30-31). This is hardly anything like what Schweitzer says about Christianity's world and life affirmation. Not a word is said here about even loving all human beings, much less loving 'all that lives'. The world has had enough of the world and life affirmation of Christianity ( or rather of Christian nations or people). Attention is invited to H. of Dh. Vol. II. p. 180, where Westermarck's remarks in his 'Origin and development of the moral ideas' (1912) Vol. I. p. 711 are cited on slavery. The world knows what during the last four or five hundred years the colonial empires of Christian countries like England, France, Holland, Belgium, Portugal and Spain did in India, Africa, S.E. Asia, the Congo and America. On p.VII of his Preface he appears to contradict himself when he disagrees with the view of Schopenhauer and Deussen about Indian thought being completely governed by the ideal of world and life negation and admits the fact that 'world and life affirmation is present at the back of this thought (Indian thought) from the very dawn of its history, and life negation and world and life affirmation constitute its chief characteristic and determine its development'. Both books ( Dr. Sweitzer's and Dr. Radhakrishnan's) are reviewed in 'Hibbert Journal' for 1953 pp. 234-241 and 355-363 by O. W. M. Gell who finds both works disappointing, holds that Schweitzer has misunderstood the Hindu ideal of supra-ethical man, that negation and affirmation have not been properly defined by him, that it was only very late in Christian history that the West began to work actively for improvement of social and economic conditions. Social service was not unknown in Ancient India. The very idea of 'pūrta 'dharma is social service. Vide above pp. 947-949. The Purāṇas emphasize the importance of work for relieving distressed beings. For example, the Mārkaṇḍeya has the following very noble sentiment (15. 57) 'men would not obtain that happiness in heaven or in the world of Brahmā which arises from giving happiness to distressed men' (न स्वर्गे ब्रह्मलोके वा तत्सुखं प्राप्यते नरैः । यदार्तजन्तुनिर्वाणदानोत्यमिति मे मतिः ॥) Vide also note 6 op pp. 3-4 of H, of Dh. vol. II.

Further, in the Mahābhārata and Smṛtis some of which at least are not far removed in time from the Upaniṣads both ahimsa and śauca ( purity ) are separately mentioned along with other duties ( dharmas) common to all varṇas. Gaut. ( 8. 23-24 ) lays down eight qualities of the soul for every dvija viz, compassion towards all beings, forbearance, freedom from jealousy, freedom from excessive harm ( to himself ), doing auspicious acts, absence of abjectness (or miserliness ), absence of discontent'. The same eight are specified in the Matsyapurāṇa 52, 8-10, Atrismr̥ti 34-41. Manu V. 46 ( = Viṣṇu Dh. 8. 51. 69 ) provides 'he who does not desire to cage or kill or cause pain to living beings, thus desirous of doing good to all, secures highest ( or never ending ) happiness'. Śauca is external ( of the body ) and internal ( of the mind). Manu V. 106 expressly says that he who is pure as to money matters is really pure and not one who washes himself with sand or water. Vide above pp. 1421-22 notes 2331 and 2333. It is worthy of note that the Śantiparve (chapter 162, 4-5 = Or. ed. 156, 4-5) contains an apotheosis of _Satya_ as the ancient Dharma and _brahman_ itself and then in verses 7-9 Satya is stated to appear in thirteen aspects such as _tyāga_ ( renunciation of attachment and pleasures ), _samata_ (being the same to all), _dama_ ( restraint of senses ), _kṣamā_ ( forbearance), _hri_ (being ashamed to boast of one's good deeds ), _anasūyā_ (absence of jealousy ), _dayā_ ( compassion ) and so on, _ahimsā_ being the 13th aspect of Satya.

It was only in Jainism that thoroughgoing ahiṁsā was preached and practised. Buddha had no objection to eating flesh, provided the animal was not killed specially for doing him honour or treating him.

IX. The three paths, viz. Karmamārga, Bhaktimarga and Jñānamārga. These have already been dealt with above in pp. 964-967, 1462. The Bhagavadgitā expounds the further doctrine of what is called niṣkāma-karmayoga, which has been explained above on pp. 966–67. Doing one's duty without hankering for the fruit thereof is worship of God.

## Adhikārabheda

X. Adhikāra-bheda

It was recognised in India from very early times that in the matter of religious worship and philosophical doctrines, there are different grades among human beings. All are not competent to grasp and act upon abstruse metaphysical doctrines or to follow higher forms of worship. This has been brought out in several places before. Vide above p. 973 note 1593 and p. 1462. Abstruse metaphysical doctrines are likely to be misunderstood and therefore we find that there is an effort to keep such doctrines secret and frequent warnings are given in the Upaniṣads not to impart the knowledge of _brahman_ to all and sundry and to keep it secret. Vide p. 1071-72 and Chan. Up. III. 11. 5 set out above on p. 1460, Śv. Up. VI. 22, Katha Up. III. 17, Bļ. Up. III. 2. 13 ( Yājñavalkya and Ārtabhāga did not discuss _brahman_ among people). The word Upaniṣad came to mean 'secret doctrine' (vide Tai. Up. II. 9 and III. 10 ). This tendency to keep abstruse doctrines secret obtained in other nations in antiquity (vide St. Mark 4. 11, 34-35). The Haṭhayogapradipika[^2628] has similar provisions (vide p. 1460 above). Many modern writers condemn people that engage in image worship. The reasons advanced for image worship by Indian works are given in note 1593 p. 973 above. The worshipper of an image of Ganeśa or Kāli casts the image in water ( a river, sea &c.) after a day or more (when the period of the festival is over ). So it is not as if he worshipped the wooden or earthen object but he has an emotional idea for the time being that God is enthroned in that object. These common people, if questioned, will say 'God is everywhere, in you, in me and in the wooden image'. The Nr̥simhapurāṇa 62.5 ( quoted by Aparārka p. 140 on Yāj. I. 101 ) says that sages declare that the worship of Hari (God Viṣṇu) may be performed in six ways, viz, in water, in fire, in one's own heart, in the sun's orb, on an altar or in an image[^2629]. The Viṣṇudharmotturapurāṇa appears to have been conscious that image worship came later in Kali age and was not prevalent in former ages (III chap. 99. 5-7 and 20).

[^2628]: हठविद्या परं गोप्या योगिना सिद्धिमिच्छता।
भवेद्वीर्यवती गुप्ता निर्वीर्या तु प्रकाशिता ॥ हठयोगप्र I. 11

[^2629]: अप्स्वग्नौ हृदये सूर्ये स्थण्डिले प्रतिमासु च । षट्स्वेतेषु हरेः सम्यगर्चनं मुनिभिः स्मृतम् ॥ अग्नौ क्रियावतां देवो ... योगिनां हृदये हरिः ॥ नृसिंहपुराण 62.5-6 (the 2nd quoted in note 1593 above). Vide स्मृतिचन्द्रिका (आहिक P. 198 ed. by Mr. Gharpure) which quotes verses from the Smṛtis of Hārita and Marīci to the same effect. vide विष्णुधर्मोत्तरपुराण III. 93. 5-7 and 20.

The present author saw in several European Churches the images of the Madonna or the images or pictures of certain saints worshipped by Christian people that addressed prayers to the image of the Madonna or the pictures of saints for fulfilment of their desires. Therefore, he thinks that it would not be wrong for him to say that the religion of many Christians in Europe is image worship[^2630]. The several darśanas (except that of Cārvāka ) were looked upon generally as approximations to truth. There was no question of all of them being false and one alone as containing the truth.

(XI) Vast Sanskrit literature.

India produced a vast amount of Sanskrit literature of a most varied character for at least three thousand years. There is no country in the world that can exhibit continuous creation of several departments of literature for such a long period. Sanskrit literature penetrated to countries like Tibet, China, Java and others. Its literature influenced the Moslem world and European world by means of the decimal place value system, its fable literature and system of Vedānta. Vide Winternitz's 'Some problems of Indian Literature ( the Readership Lectures in Calcutta University ) pp. 59–81 for a brief but instructive treatment of the influence of Sanskrit Literature in the West. Its study by Europeans at the end of the 18th century and in the 19th century laid the foundation of several sciences, such as the science of language, of comparative religion, of thought and of mythology. There exist several Histories of Sanskrit Literature by several scholars such as Weber, Max Müller, Winternitz, Keith, M. Krishnamachariar, which will give an idea to any roader of the variety and vastness of Sanskrit literature.

[^2630]: Vide 'Hinduism and Buddhism' by Sir Charles Elliot, Vol. I. Intro. p. LXX, where a similar view is expressed by the learned writer who relies also on William James. 'Varieties of religious experience' pp. 525–527. Sir Oliver Lodge in 'Man and the Universe' (London, 1908 ) pp. 246-247) says "There are plenty of good reasons against idolatry among intellectual and 'chosen' people but this (God was jealous of idol worship) is not one of them; nor is it to be supposed that the stock of a tree is ever really worshipped even when prostrated to. An idol, to ignorant and undeveloped people, is a symbol of something which they are really worshipping under a material form and embodiment, the sensuous presentation assists their infantile efforts towards abstract thought as material sacraments help people in a higher stage of religious development; but some of these helps should be outgrown."

## Vast Sanskrit Literature

India has preserved for itself and for the world a vast literature in the best part of which the principal theme is to ask men never to cease in their efforts to control the senses and to reach higher and higher heights of morality and spirituality. H. H. Gowen in 'A History of Indian Literature' (1931 ) observes (on p. 8) 'Indian literature has an intrinsic value which no remoteness avails to destroy. For sacredness, variety and continuity, scarcely any other may compare with it, certainly none surpasses it. As for sacredness no other scripture, not even our Bible, may compete with the Veda in its continuity or in the matter of general acceptance'. He dilates also on the variety and remarkable continuity of Indian literature. Classical Sanskrit first blossomed at least before 500 B.C. Pāṇini names at least ten predecessors and his sūtras IV. 3. 87 and 88 clearly indicate that before his time there was considerable non-vedic secular literature.

XII. Yoga : Yoga has been treated of above (pp. 1385_ 1462). In the whole world there exists hardly any well thought out and comprehensive system of psychical and moral discipline like Yoga. Mercea Eliade observes (on p. 359 ) in 'Yoga, Immortality and Freedom' (tr. by Willard R. Trask, 1958)

Yoga constitutes a characteristic dimension of the Indian mind, is marked by reaction against metaphysical speculations and the excesses of a fossilized ritualism'. Western minds having experienced a surfeit of economic prosperity, but worried by the tensions and crises of these times are turning more and more to Yoga and to Indian philosophy such as the Vedānta. In recent years numerous books are being published that deal with 'perennial philosophy', Yoga (including Tibetan Yoga), meditation, concentration, mystical experience &c. Many of these books are written by honest people after reading a good deal of literature on these subjects but they are wanting in any personal yogic or mystic experience. There are some books that are written by persons who want to take advantage of the popular craze for Yoga and similar mystical practices for the sake of wealth and fame. In 'Vedanta for the Western World' edited by Christopher Isherwood (Allen and Unwin, London, 1948) the famous writer Mr. Aldous Huxley sounds a note of warning against the plethora of books on mysticism and Yoga in the market (p. 376 ).

XIII Philosophy :

The central point of much of our philosophy is contained in Chandogyopaniṣad VI.1, where Uddālaka inquires of his conceited son Śvetaketu "Have you asked for that instruction by which one hears what cannot be heard, by which one perceives what cannot be perceived, by which one knows what cannot be known;' and when Śvetaketu asked for that instruction, Uddālaka expounds to him (in VI. 1-16 ) the subject at length and winds up with the words 'tat-tvam-asi' (thou art that Self). An inquirer into philosophy will find in the various branches of Indian philosophy a vast mass of material, hardly surpassed by any other ancient country in the world. The word for philosophy is _darśana_ and there is a famous work called 'Sarvadarśansangraha' in which fifteen different points of view apart from _advaita_ Vedānta are summarised. The principal orthodox darśanas are six- Sāṅkhya, Yoga, Nyāya, Vaiśeṣika. Pūrvamimāmsā and Uttaramımāmsā' (or Vedānta ), which have been treated above and their relation to and influence on Dharmaśāstra has been dwelt upon. The chief marks of Indian philosophy are that it concentrates on the spiritual, that philosophy has to be lived and not merely discussed, that it seeks the Reality, that for real philosophy great moral preparation is necessary, that reason has to be extensively used in arriving at the truth, that tradition and authority have to be accepted and not neglected. Almost all darśanas ( except that of Cārvāka) are concerned with Liberation ( variously called Mokṣa, Kaivalya, Nirvāna, Amṛtatva Niḥśreyasa, Apavarga) and all (except Cārvāka ) are agreed on the doctrine of Karma and Punarjanma. It is not necessary to say more on Indian Philosopby in this Chapter.

XIV. Arts. Architecture, Sculpture, Painting :

Though the present author has travelled throughout India for over fifty years and seen most of the famous places rich in ancient architecture, sculpture and painting, he lays no claim to being a connoisseur in those matters and cannot give his own valuation of these relics of ancient Indian Art. The number of works on these is legion. A more bibliography would not be of much use to the reader. Therefore, he will content himself with mentioning a few works on each of the above branches which he has read wholly or partly or which he consulted.

Among the most remarkable ancient monuments of India are the stūpa at Sānchi, the paintings in the Ajanṭā caves, the Kailāsa temple at Ellora, and the Koṇarka[^2631] temple in Orissa.

Some of the Puraṇas contain information on the above topics. The Matsyapurāṇa (chap. 25%. 2-4) names 18 expounders of Vāstuśāstra (architecture ) such as Bhṛgu, Atri, Vasiṣtha, Viśvakarman, Maya, Nārada, Nagnajit, Viśālākṣa, Purandara, Brahmā, Kumāra, Nandiśa, Śaunaka, Garga, Vāsudeva, Aniruddha, Śukra and Bṛhaspati. Chapters 253–257 deal with the construction of mansions and houses, chap. 258–263 with images of several deities. The Vāyupurāṇa (8.108 ff.) describes the founding of a capital Agnipurāṇa, chapters 42, 104-106 deal with the building of mansions, houses and laying out cities. The Viṣṇudharmottara (third section) is called _citrasūtra_[^2632] because dancing is held to be the primary art and painting rests on it. It is further said that painting is the best of arts (III. 33. 38) and the foremost of auspicious things in a house, that the rules that apply to painting are applicable to the making of images of metals, stone and wood (III 43.31-32). Chapters 36-43 deal with painting, chapters 44-85 with the making of images of gods and goddesses and house building is dilated upon in chap. 86 ff The Bṛhat-samhita ( ed. by M. M. Sudhakar Dvivedi, 1895 ) of Varāhamihira (500-550 A.D.) deals with palaces, mansions and houses of king, crown prince and others; in chap. 52 (123 verses) with temples of several gods, in chap. 53 ( 31 verses) with images of gods, in chap. 57 (Rāma, Viṣṇu, Brahma, Indra, Śiva, Buddha, Jina, the Sun, Linga, Mother Goddesses, Yama ), with images or statues of five kinds of men (chap. 68 verse 30 ) called Haṁsa, Śaśa, Ruçaka, Bhadra and Mālavya and their bodily features.

[^2631]: For Koṇārka, vide H. of Dh. Vol. IV of 769, Modern Review (Calcutta ) for 1945 pp. 67–72 with seven illustrations by Mr. Pranakrushna Samal and 'A time in India' by Ross Smith pp. 198-201 on 'Konarka, its mithunas and several explantions about them'. The tower of the temple of the Son 24 miles to the N. W. of Puri is 180 feet in height, the Maṇḍapa in front is 140 feet high. In 'Orissan Sculpture and Architecture' by O. C. Ganguly and A. Goswami (1956, Calcutta ) out of 41 plates, plates 21-41 relate to the Sun temple of Koṇārka. For Sānchi, three big volumes with numerous plates have been published by the Govt. of India, the editors being Sir John Marshall, A. Foucher and N.Majumdar.

[^2632]: Vide the present author's 'History of Sanskrit Poetics' (1961) pp, 66–72 for an account of the Viṣṇudharmottara and its date (575-650 A. D.). Dr. Miss Stella Kramrisch has translated into English the chapters of the Viṣṇudharmottara bearing on painting and sculpture ( Cal. Un, 1928). Varāha-mihira mentions several authors such as Garga and Manu on palaces (55,31 ), Nagnajit (57. 4) and Vasiṣṭha (57. 8) on images.

There are several other works like the Yuktikalpataru of Bhoja ( Calcutta ed. of 1917 ), the Abhilaṣitārthacintāmaṇi ( also called Mānasollāsa )[^2633] of king Someśvara, Śilparatna (T. 8. 8.), Mayamata (T. 8. 8.) on these subjects.

Paintings - The only famous ancient paintings are those in the caves of Ajanta, in the Bagh caves in the former Gwalior State and those in the caves at Sigiriya in Ceylon. For reasons of space it is not possible to quote the enthusiastic appreciations of Western writers on ancient Indian Art, particularly paintings and sculpture. The author would quote a few passages from Rene Grousset's[^2634] works: 'India has given a mighty art or a complete Aesthetic equal in originality and power to the Greek and Chinese. It is marked by its naturalism in depicting animals'. The same writer says about Ajanta's immortal paintings 'they count among the most moving that have ever come within human vision'. In 'civilizations of the East' (tr. by Mrs. C. A. Phillips, London, 1932 with 249 illustrations) the same author (after citing paintings of the Jātakas of self sacrifice ) remarks 'these are but a few examples, the most poetic, tender and moving that could be imagined. No better example could be found of that purely Indian sentiment of universal brotherhood, that fervour of humanitarianism which extends even to animals and plants' (p. 79). For Ajanta, there is a fine edition by Dr. G. Yazdani, the text in two parts ( 1930 and 1933 ) and there are besides many coloured and monochrome plates with an Introduction by Lawrence Binyon. There is also another small work prepared for the use of Lord Reading on his visit to Ajanta in 1924 in which Dr. Yazdani gives ten colour plates and one monochrome plate (of a bull fight ) with notes on some of the scenes in several caves and appreciations by Binyon, Rothenstein, Solomon and others. Another good book is 'my pilgrimage to Ajanta and Bagh' by Sri Mukul Chandra Dey, with Introduction by Lawrence Binyon (London, 1925).

[^2633]: The third Viṁśati of Mānasollāsa deals with Vāstuśāstra, painting, images of gods and goddesses, planets &c. (vide part II of the work in G.O.S. ).

[^2634]: Vide 'The Sum of History' by Rene Grousset, translated by A. & H. Temple Patterson, Tower Bridge Publications, 1951, p. 105, p. 107 about Ajanta.

## Works on Paintings and Sculpture

A third book on Ajanta is in Marathi written and published in 1929 by Balasaheb Pant Pratinidhi, Chief of Aundh State, with half-tone and coloured Illustrations. Percy Brown on 'Indian Painting' deals with Buddhist, Hindu and Mahomedan Painting and covers a long period from 6th century A. D. to 19th Century A. D. He gives two illustrations of Sigiriya paintings opposite pp. 33, 69, which are remarkably similar to some paintings in caves 16 and 17 at Ajanta. In Ananda K. Coomaraswamy's 'History of Indian and Indonesian Art' illustrations No. 183 and No. 184 are respectively from Bagh and Sigiriya.

Many modern works deal with all three viz. architecture sculpture and painting or with two of them or with one only. Some important works are mentioned here :

1. EB. Havell's 'Indian Sculpture and Painting' (London,1908) with 45 plates for sculpture and 8 for painting.
2. V. A. Smith's 'History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon' with 38 illustrations (including some of Moslem Art), Oxford, 1911.
3. A. Foucher's 'Beginnings of Buddhist Art' (1917), with plates.
4. Ananda K, Coomarswamy's 'History of Indian and Indonesian Art' ( 1927), with 400 illustrations on 128 plates.
5. 'Ellora'by Balasaheb Pant Pratinidhi, Chief of Aundh with 89 half-tone illustrations, published by D. B. Taraporevala and Sons, Bombay.
6. James Fergusson's 'History of Indian and Eastern Architecture', volumes I and II, London, 1910.
7. T. A. Gopinath Rao's 'Elements of Hindu Iconography', Vol. I and II (Madras, 1914, 1916 ).
8. Dr. Stella Kramrisch on 'The Art of India' (sculpture, painting, architecture), London, Phaidon Press, 1954, with 156 plates and 7 coloured plates.
9. Dr. Stella Kramrisch's 'Indian Sculpture' (1933 ) with 116 illustrations.
10. Rene Grousset's 'The civilizations of the East' VOL II (on India) with 249 illustrations.
11. A. V. T. Iyer's 'Indian Architecture' in three volumes (Madras ).
12. Ananda K. Coomarswamy's 'Elements of Buddhist Iconography' (Harvard Un. Cambridge, U. S. A., 1935); also his 'Dance of Śiva' (frontispiece of Naṭarāja in cosmic dance ), Foreword by Romain Rolland, 27 plates, (1924).
13. 'Indian Architecture '(Buddhist and Hindu), published by D. B. Taraporevala and Sons, Bombay, with 118 illustrations.
14. Benjamin Rowland's 'The Art and Architecture of India' (Buddhist, Hindu, Jain), Penguin Books, 1956; remarks that some sculptures are worthy of being placed in world culture and the Art presents synthesis of beautiful forms and deep spiritual expression.
15. Heinrich Zimmer's 'Myths and Symbols of Indian Art and Civilization' posthumously published by J. Campbell, 70 plates from 2nd century B.C. to 19th century A.D.
16. 'Immortal India' by Alfred Nawrath, translated from German, published by D. B. Taraporewala and Sons, Bombay, with 12 coloured and 106 photographic reproductions, 1956.
17. H. Goetz's 'Five thousand years of Indian Art' Bombay, 1959; 72 plates (many coloured ones) and two maps ; D. B. Taraporewala and Sons, Bombay.
18. Sir John Marshall's 'Buddhist Art of Gandhāra' Vol.I, Memoir of Archaeological Department of Pakistan, 1960, ( 111 Plates) and his work in three volumes on 'Taxila' Cambridge Un. Press 1951 for scholars, and his 'Guide to Taxila' ( 4th ed. of 1960 ) for tourists and general readers.

South Indian Architecture and Sculpture has some peculiarities of its own. Some works thereon may be mentioned here viz. 'Dravidian Architecture' by G.J. Dubreuil (1917), 'Mahabalipuram' by C. Śivaramamurty (Dept. of Archaeology ) 7 full page plates; 'Art of Pallavas' text and notes by B. C. Ganguly and ed. by A. Goswami, 46 plates ( 1957).

Besides, on music also several works have been written : 'Music of Hindustan' (Oxford 1914 ) by A. H. Fox Strangway Alain Danielou's 'Northern Indian music' vol. I and II (London, 1949, 1954), H. A. Popley's 'the Music of India', (Calcutta, 1950), O. Goswami's 'The story of Indian Music' ( Bombay, 1957 ), G. H. Ranade's 'Hindustani Music and Outline of its Physics and Aesthetics' (Poona, 1951). But the present author unfortunately knows little about music.

## Spread of Indian Culture in S. E. Asia

Indian architectonic and iconographic symbolism spread to Java, Bali and other parts of Indonesia and many works have been written on this subject such as 'Barabudor' (Java) by Paul Mus, G.Gorer's 'Bali and Angkor', 'Towards Angkor' by Quaritch Wales (with a full Bibliography at end), W. F. Stutterheim's 'Indian influences in Balinese Art' (London, 1935).

A few more characteristics could have been mentioned; the present writer desists from adding them since the list is already a long one. It is not claimed that no other culture had or has these characteristics. What is claimed is that there is no other single culture in the world where all these can be found now or existed in the past and that some of these characteristics such as the noble Vedānta concept of man, lower animals and even inanimate things being one in Essence, the great tolerance throughout the ages for differing religious and philosophical views, the emphasis on _satya_ and _ahiṁsa_ are unique and not found elsewhere.
