+++
title = "37 Future Trends"

+++

CHAPTER XXXVII

## Future Trends

After the battle of Plassey in 1757 the civil government of the three large provinces of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa came under British rule from 1765. From 1818 when the last Peshwa Bajirao II was defeated and became a pensioner, the British were in control over the whole of India except Punjab, which was subdued in 1845. The British left India in 1947. Therefore, they were rulers over a large part of India for 180 years, over the whole of it except Punjab for about 130 years and over Punjab just about 100 years. The impact of British occupation during these periods on Hindu society was tremendous in all spheres, physical, mental and moral. The changes effected during these years of British rule were of such magnitude that they far exceeded the changes that occurred in hundreds of years before the coming of the British. With the advent of British rule came a new system of Government on an all India basis, establishment of courts of justice on Western patterns, laws that applied to all Indians without distinction, modern individualistic liberty, Western pattern of living at least in towns and cities, an educational system placing all Indians on the same level, newspapers, better means of transport, study of modern science, English literature and arts &c.

The present author has no intention of writing anything on the all round changes that have taken place in India under British rule. All that he proposes to do in this chapter is to indicate briefly the effects that are likely to be produced on Hindu society, its ancient ideals and values in the near future, on account of science and modern ideas, the Constitution framed for Indian democracy, the idea of a secular State, socialistic pattern of society, economical planning, legislation, growth of population and means to check it.

## British colonial policy and its effects

But before he deals with the above subjects, it is necessary to give a rapid review of the state of things before Independence was achieved. Lord Ripon as Viceroy of India in 1882 started a scheme of local self-government by means of municipal corporations in the cities and district and local Boards in the rural areas. Thus after about 120 years from 1765 when British rule was first established in a large part of India, the British thought fit to associate the conquered people in managing some of their own (unimportant and petty) affairs. Colonialism on the part of the British had reached its peak by that time. The British imported raw materials like cotton from India, processed them in Manchester and exported the manufactured products back to India's immense market. At the instance of British manufacturers laws were passed in Britain forbidding the import of Indian silk and cotton goods. India was drained of wealth by that policy for over a hundred years and India became one of tbe poorest countries in the world. Dadabhai Naoroji in his 'Poverty and un-British rule in India' (London, 1901, 675 pages) demonstrated this very ably. The main elements of the colonial rule of Britain were these; complete political subjection existed; the main economic activity was in the hands of foreigners, it was foreign capital that was employed in India and substantial dividends or interest on the capital were guaranteed in some cases like the Railways by the British rulers of India payable from the taxes imposed on Indian people, the control of large enterprises was in foreign hands and directed towards securing foreign interests, the land and people were used as instruments of the purposes of Britain. India got peace and political unity at the cost of enormous poverty and distress and many of the economic problems that beset present day India have to be traced back to the disastrous colonial policies of Britain.

The army of the Government of India was for over a century entirely officered by the British. There were in the 20th century about 7000 officers (lieutenants, captains, majors, colonels ) among whom not one Indian held the King's commission till after the first world war. Then a few were sent every year for training to England. The examination for entry in the Indian civil[^2635] Service (the 'Steel frame' of the Indian administration, as one great British Prime Minister was pleased to call it) was held in England (in spite of a Resolution of the House of Commons that the examination for appointment to the Indian Civil Services in 1893 should be held simultaneously in India and England ).

[^2635]: A well known jibe in the author's youth was that an I. C. S. was neither Indian (almost all were British in those days) nor civil nor a servant ( but he was the master of the destinies of poor India), Munro wrote in 1817 a memorandum to Lord Hastings from which two sentences may be quoted : 'there is perhaps no example of any conquest in which the natives have been so completely excluded from all share of the Government of their country as in British India... Foreign conquerors have treated the natives with violence and often with great cruelty, but none has treated them with so much scorn as we' pp. 273-74 of 'the Making of Indian Princes' (London, 1943 ) by Edward Thompson, Vide G. W, Forrest's 'Selections from the Minutes and other official writings of Elphinstone' (London, 1884 ) p 102 for reproach against British rule in India.

Only a few Indians in the last quarter of the 19th century could go to England and qualify for entry in that heaven-born service. District officers such as Collectors, District Judges, Police Superintendents, Medical officers of the Indian Medical Service ) were almost all British. Almost all Professors in colleges and the head masters of even some secondary schools were Englishmen. All the books to be used in schools were prescribed by the Head of the Department of Public Instruction in the several provinces, all of whom were Westerners. Even primary education was being given only to a small fraction of the children of school-going age, even in 1947 when the British left. The elements of colonial rule by Britain and the policies pursued by the British rulers are emphasized here solely as warnings to present warring elements in our country that if they pursue their quarrels to bitter ends the nation may again be plunged into a miserable state by invasions from powerful and hostile neighbours.

Morley (who was Secretary of State for India and who was believed by many Indians to be a man of liberal or even radical views ) introduced separate communal electorates for Moslems in the reforms of 1909 and he was firmly of opinion that a Parliamentary system in India should not be established in the foreseeable[^2636] future. It is unnecessary to refer in detail to Montagu's famous speech in 1917, characterizing the Indian Government as too wooden, too antediluvian for modern times, to his statement ( the reverse of Morley's views ) that the policy of the British Government is the gradual development of self governing institutions with a view to the progressive realization of responsible Government in India as an integral part of the British Empire,' the failure of Dyarchy introduced by Montagu, the Rowlatt Acts, unrest in Punjab, General Dyer's proclamation declaring any assembly of four or more persons as unlawful, his shooting of men, women and children assembled in Jallianwallah Bagh for a meeting in defiance of the proclamation, when, even according to Government statistics, 300 people were killed and 1200 injured, Dyer's compulsory retirement and the presentation of a purge of thirty thousand pounds to him by his British admirers for saying the British Empire (as they then thought).  

[^2636]: Vide the volume of "Indian Speeches" by Viscount Morley (p. 92 ) where he says " If my existence, either officially or corporeally, were prolonged twenty times longer than either of them is likely to be, a Parliamentary system in India is not at all the goal to which I would for one moment aspire'. Even so late as 1941 Sir G. Schuster in " India and - Democracy" (MacMillan, 1941 ) strongly expressed the view that Parliamentary democracy of the Westminster pattern would not suit India and that Indians would have to work out a system of their own. He does not even indicate how, while the British ruled India, a democratic system could be evolved by Indians and in how many years.

## British approach to treatment and training of Indians  

The introduction of education through English was espoused by Lord Macaulay in his 'Minute on Indian Education'. Why he insisted on the education of Indians through English is stated in the Minute as follows: 'We must at present do our best to form a class who may be interpreters between us and the millions whom we govern; a class of persons Indian in blood and colour, but English in taste, in opinion, in morals and intellect': [^2637] English education caused great wastage of effort in learning all subjects (including even Sanskrit) through English and led to a disproportionate pursuit of literary studies and neglect of scientific and technological subjects and created a wide gulf between the educated and the uneducated masses; it glorified Western culture and did not help Indians to study and appreciate their own culture. Educated Indians, particularly in the earlier period of English education in India, came to entertain an exaggerated respect for Western institutions and unduly disparaged their own social and religious systems.

The British Government's interest in Indian education (particularly higher education ) was lukewarm. Three Universities (of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras ) were first established in 1857 for the whole of India, but they were merely examining bodies. In the whole of the Bombay Presidency there was no Science Institute entirely maintained by Government till about 1920.

8h and led to objects (includinused great we

[^2637]: Vide 'Speeches by Lord Macaulay' with Minute on Indian Education, edited by G. M. Young ( Oxford Un, Press 1952). The minute is on pp. 344-361. On p. 349 he makes the following statement 'I have conversed both here and at home with men distinguished by their proficiency in the Eastern tongues. _'I have never found one among them who could deny that a single shelf of a good European Library was worth the whole native literature of India and Arabia._' Vide p. 359 of the above work for the above oft-quoted passage.

An Indian could pass the M. A. examination in Philosophy without knowing anything about ancient Indian philosophy till only a few years ago. However, English education by Government and missionaries produced a result exactly opposite of what was expected by them. The missionaries miserably failed in securing the Indians (except a few among the lower castes and ādivāsis ) for Christ and Government found that reading the classics of English literature and works of men like Burke, Spencer, Mill and others created among the educated emotions of nationalism and discontent with their own abject political status. Political agitation daily increased. Lokamanya Tilak was called 'the father of Indian unrest' by an English writer. He passed away in 1920. But his mantle fell on Mahatma Gandhi, who while agitating for political power and eventual freedom, adopted the technique of satyāgraha.

It is not necessary to go into the freedom struggle from 1919 to 1947 which culminated in the British leaving India but after dividing it into Pakistan and the present India. The partition of India into two parts based on merely communal considerations let loose the most hideous conflicts, massacres and flights of millions of refugees which India had ever witnessed during its long history. The giving up of a large empire with mutual consent and without war or bloodshed is a unique and unparalleled event in the whole history of the world. The message of the King of Great Britain read by Lord Mountbatten as Viceroy to the members of the Constituent Assembly was nobly and graciously worded "With this transfer of power by consent comes the fulfilment of a great democratic ideal to which the British and Indian people alike are firmly dedicated.' Dr. Rajendra Prasad's reply to the message of the King was couched in equally noble and just language "While our achievement is in no small measure due to our sufferings and sacrifices, it is also the result of world forces and events, and last, though not least, it is the consummation and fulfilment of the historic traditions and democratic ideals of the British race" (vide "Transfer of power in India" by Shri V. P. Menon, published by Orient Longmans, 1957, p. 415 ).

##Constituent Assembly and the Constitution

The Indian Independence Act[^2637A] was passed by the British Parliament and Royal assent was given on 18th July 1947. A Constituent Assembly had been set up by the cabinet mission (of three cabinet ministers, Pethick Lawrence, Secretary of State for India, Stafford Cripps and A. V. Alexander ) and it held its first meeting in December 1946. It re-assembled in August 1947 as a sovereign body to frame a constitution for free India. Its work went on for over two years and the constitution consisting of 395 Articles and nine Schedules came into force on 26th January 1950 (except 15 Articles that came into force at once ); vide Art. 394.

The Preamble to the Constitution of India declares that India is a sovereign democratic Republic. The extent of the Indian Republic even at present is vast. It was hardly ever under one Government, except possibly under Aśoka. In ancient times India had some _gaṇarājyas_ or _saṅgharājyas_ ( oligarchic states, or republics as Jayaswal and some others prefer to call them ). This question of the existence of oligarchies (or republics ) in ancient India has been discussed at some length by the present author in Vol. III pp. 87–96 of the H. of Dh. He still adheres to the views there expressed. The Buddhist monks had a procedure for regulating the meetings of their _saṅgha_ ( as set out in the Mahāvagga IX. 3 in SBE Vol. XVII p. 264 ff and in Cullavagga IV. 9, SBE Vol. XX pp. 24-27 and pp. 53 ff) and Jayaswal conjectures that the same procedure was followed in oligarchies (or republics ).

There are substantial achievements to the credit of present India and its leaders during the last 14 years after Independence. Some of them may be very succinctly stated here: (1) The production of a comprehensive democratic constitution guaranteeing freedom of speech and worship, freedom of the Press, protection of the rights of minorities, equality of all before the law, equality of status to women, independent judiciary; (2) Abolition of untouchability (Art. 17 ); (3) political integration of India without any violence, as the five hundred and odd States (except only three ), that comprised nearly 1/3rd of the total land area of India and 1/4th of the population, patriotically accepted a merger of the States in the Indian Republic ( Shri, V. P. Menon's 'Story of the Integration of States'); ( 4 ) Reorganization of India into 15 States and six Union Territories based mostly on linguistic unity and administrative convenience; (5) holding two elections on the basis of adult suffrage, viz. every person [^2637b] (male or female) who is a citizen of India, is twenty-one years of age and not disqualified under the constitution or any other law, has a right to be registered as a voter at elections to the House of the people and to the Legislative Assemblies of States (Art. 326 ); (6) Socialistic pattern of society as the goal ( Art. 38, 39 ); (7) Two five year plans have been carried out and a third Five Year Plan has been set on foot (under Schedule VII, list III, item 20 ). The creation of a democratic republic was something that India had not been acquainted with for at least twelve centuries (even if _gañarājyas_ were held to be republics and not merely obligarchies ). From Ṛgvedic times there was a hereditary monarchical form of rule. Vide Ṛg. VII. 33.3 and 5, VII. 83. 7-8, where the battle of ten kings ( daśa rājānaḥ) with king Sudās is mentioned; vide also the story of Devāpi and Śantanu in Ṛg. X, 98 expanded in Nirukta II. 10-12.

Some criticism may be offered against the Constitution. In the first place, it is extremely bulky and goes into too many details and is a hotchpotch of provisions from several sources. Some provisions are derived from England, the directive principles of State policy are derived from the constitutions of Ireland and other countries of Europe, some are borrowed from the Government of India Act of 1935. Several of these need not have been put in a Constitution but should have been left to ordinary legislation. In spite of such a lengthy constitution there are many omissions. Nothing is expressly said about political parties, about industrial corporations, about relation of religions and the State. The Constitution makes a complete break with our traditional ideas. Dharmasūtras and Smṛtis begin with the dharmas ( duties ) of the people ( varṇas and aśramas ). Prime Minister Pandit Nehru himself says in his Azad Memorial Lectures on 'India to-day and to-morrow' (1959) p. 45 'All of us now talk of and demand rights and privileges, but the teaching of the old dharma was about duties and obligations. Rights follow duties discharged.' Unfortunately this thought finds no place in the Constitution.



[^2637A]: Vide 'Transfer of Power in India'; Appendix XI sets out tbe Indian Independence Act, 1947 at pp. 516-532 and Appendix XII gives Congress comments on the draft independence bill with Nehru's corrections signed by him on 3-7-47 (pp. 1-9).
[^2637b]: Women had no votes in Great Britain till the first war and even now in Switzerland women have no votes ( vide p. 31 of 'Switzerland in perspective ' by George Soloveytchik (1954).

## Common people feel that they have only rights and no duties.  

One fact of the greatest importance in the life of India is the accession of the masses to power, not only political, but also social, economical, intellectual and moral. The Constitution engenders a feeling among common people that they have rights and no obligations whatever and that the masses have the right to impose their will and to give the force of law and justice to their own ideas and norms formed in their own cottages and tea shops.

The Constitution of India has no chapter on the duties of the people to the country or to the people as a whole. Art. 19 confers the right to seven freedoms, one of which (c) is to form associations or unions and sub-article ( 4 ) enables the State to make laws imposing, _in the interest of public order or morality_, reasonable restrictions. The framers of the Constitution forgot to include what Britain had provided long before in 17 and 18 Geo. 5, Chapter 22, Article 1, part of which runs 'any strike is illegal if it is designed or calculated to coerce the Government directly or by inflicting hardship on the community'. The eyes of some of the framers of this constitution were opened by the strike of Government servants in the Railways, Posts and Telegraphs by which, if it had continued for even a fortnight, crores of people would have had to submit to incalculable hardships and the action of the strikers in essential services would have been like a rebellion by some lakhs of people against over forty crores of people. The right to strike by workers tacitly given in the constitution is in imitation of similar rights enjoyed in industrial countries like Britain only for the last few decades and the framers should have restricted the right to strikes between private employers and employees as an experiment in the first instance.

Another criticism is that there are too many amendments. From 1950 there have been ten amendments, while in the U. S. A, there have been only 22 amendments during a period of about 170 years. The very first amendment was made within less than a year and a half from the day the Constitution came into force. It affected about a dozen Articles, among which there were three Articles dealing with fundamental rights viz. 15, 19, 31. One fails to understand the meaning of the words 'fundamental rights' in a constitution which took over two years of deliberations, if they could be changed within a year and a half. The amendment made in Article 31 prohibits a person from challenging in a court of justice a law about the compensation to be paid to a person for compulsory acquisition of his property. This is a serious inroad on rights to private property and smacks of spoliation and arbitrariness. In the House of the People the quorum is only 50 and if 50 persons are present and a majority of them ( say 26 ) decide that a certain amount of compensation should be paid for compulsory acquisition of several properties of a person and the compensation is felt to be ridiculously low he has no remedy in a court of law at all. Besides, the Welfare State is, if at all, foreshadowed in the Directive Principles of State Policy (Art. 38, 39 etc.), but these principles are not enforceable in a court of law and, therefore, they are inferior to fundamental rights, the breach of which can be examined by the High Court or Supreme Court, which is invested with the power of issuing writs. Parliament (Lokasabha) has over 500 members and the quorum is 50 and yet this small number is not often present and the Speaker has several times to reprimand the House of the People on this score.

Another criticism my be offered as to the inclusion of Universities in list II (of schedule 7, State List, No. 11 ) and not in the concurrent list. Vocational and technical training of labour is in the concurrent list (Item 25 ). Is not University education throughout India of as much importance as the training of labour? Only items 63-66 (of list I, Union list ) are within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Central Government.[^2638] There is hardly any weighty reason (except chance ) why the Benares Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim University, the Delhi University and Santiniketan should be treated as the exclusive concern of the Central Government and the other Universities be not placed even in the concurrent list.



[^2638]: Vide 'Our fundamental rights' by D. N. Banerjee for an exhaustive and trenchant criticism of the change made in Art. 31 (2), the speeches of the Prime Minister and of Hon'ble Mr. G. B. Pant (Pp. 316-336) Calcutta, 1960.

## Effect of making Hindi the only official language.

The Constitution in its 8th Schedule recognizes fourteen languages as the national languages of India, while Article 343 (1) makes Hindi the official language of the Union, but sub-article 2 ( of Article 343 ) provides that English will continue to be used for all official purposes for fifteen years and sub-article 3 provides that Parliament may continue even after 1965 the use of English for purposes specified by Parliament. Even such a small country as Switzerland has three official languages. The Constitution should have provided at least two Official languages for north India and two for South India, when even in 1950 the population of India was about 36 crores. This sweeping decision to make Hindi the only official language instead of helping emotional integration of Indians produced great strife. An official language is not the only means of emotional integration, nor even the chief one. The Govt. should begin with the children in the schools, should instil into their minds the fundamental cultural Unity of India, and that India has been looked upon as one by all foreign invaders, steps should be taken to make every Indian feel that he is the inheritor of the vast ancient wisdom and spiritual culture of India, that he must contribute to the conservation of that culture, and must add to its greatness in the future, and free and compulsory education for all children up to the age of 14 should have been achieved in ten years as foreshadowed in Art. 45.

A plan and programme to instil among all grown-up citizens the ideal of national integration must be prepared, insisting on our common past, common interests, common future and on elements like the wisdom and thought embodied in Sanskrit and the regional languages, the tolerance shown by our people through the ages.

The Constitution has also committed several mistakes in the allotment of subjects in the 7th Schedule as Union list, State List and Concurrent list. For example, the production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors are put in the State List (item 8 in List II, State List). This has led to prohibition in some States, but also its absence in other States.

The above discussion is enough to show that the Constitution framed after more than two years' cogitation is unsatisfactory in several ways.

Ours is a democratic Republic. The most famous definition of democracy is Lincoln's viz. 'Government of the people by the people for the people'. All three must exist in a proper democracy. In the Greek city States such as Athens all adult citizens ( except. slaves that outnumbered citizens ) could assemble and could directly participate in discussion and the framing of laws and regulations. But this is impossible when crores of people spread over a vast country are voters. Therefore, one part of Lincoln's definition becomes watered down. Crores of people cannot govern themselves, which is a physical impossibility. All they can do is to choose some men as their rulers. In former ages when monarchy was the prevailing form the ruler came to be so by succession or by conquest i.e. by breaking heads. Now, under democracy, the ruler or rulers are chosen by the mere counting of heads. As observed by Dr. Radhakrishnan in 'Kalkin or the future of civilization' ( 4th ed. of 1956 ) 'Democracy in actual working rarely permits a country to be governed by its ablest. The opinions of the mass prevail over those of the thinking few. We must strive for some better way for conducting human affairs than the lottery of the ballot-box' (pp. 20-22). René Guenon in 'Crisis of the modern world' (translated by Arthur Osborne, London, 1932 ) remarks 'the law is supposed to be made by the opinion of the majority, but what is overlooked is that this opinion is something that can very easily be guided or modified i.e. opinion can be manufactured. The majority on whatever question it may be called on to give its opinion is always composed of the incompetent, whose number is vastly greater than that of the men who can give an opinion based on a full knowledge of the subject' (p. 108 ).

These words of René Guenon refer to conditions in European countries in most of which there has been almost cent per cent literacy for some decades. Parliamentary democracy assumes that voters understand the policies and programmes of different parties and cast their votes accordingly. It presupposes some education, intelligence, respect for the rule of law, tolerance, a sense of brotherhood for at least one's countrymen, and a more or loss homogeneous society. But when, as in India at present, the vast majority of voters are illiterate, the state of things becomes far worse. We can and must tolerate democracy in India as a first step towards better days, though at present it is a mere shell and is ridiculed by some unsympathetic foreigners.[^2639] The census of 1961 discloses that literacy which was only 16.6 percent in 1951 is 23.7 percent in 1961. Dean Inge in 'Christian Ethics'(1930) remarks about politics in England where almost all voters are literate 'our politics are so corrupt that many would welcome a dictatorship.' (p. 385 ). About the U.S. A., a recent work 'Corruption in Washington' by Blair Bolles (Gollancz, London, 1960), which makes rather dismal reading, indicates the terrible moral predicament of the honest man in power caught between public responsibility and loyalty to his friends and associates. In our country also ministers and officials must be in a similar predicament, particularly when there exist numerous rules and regulations about permits and licenses galore.

[^2639]: A. Koestler in 'Lotus and Robot' (London, 1960 ) remarks 'India is a democracy in name only, it would be more correct to call it Bapucracy' (p. 156).

## Moral predicament of elected men in power

The Directive Principles of state policy are contained in Articles 37 to 51 and it is provided in Article 37 that they shall not be enforceable by any court, but that they are _fundamental_ in the governance of the country. Article 45 enacts that the State shall endeavour to provide within a period of ten years from the commencement of this constitution _for free and compulsory education for all children until they complete the age of fourteen years_. It is more than twelve years since the commencement of the Constitution. In spite of the fact that about 7000 crores of rupees were to be spent on grandiose schemes in the two Five Year Plans, this fundamental provision was not implemented. Even free and compulsory primary education of all children up to the age of _eleven_ years ( instead of 14 as envisaged in Article 45 ) is not accomplished and it is promised that in the Third Five Year Plan (which envisages an expenditure of over ten thousand crores of rupees ) this may be accomplished. But, if the huge sums for the third plan be not forthcoming, the first casualty will be education. The education of the masses who are to be voters and indirectly rulers of the nation continues to be sadly neglected even after Independence.

It is remarkable that the directive principles of state policy mostly contain provisions on the economic system for raising people's standard of living (Art. 43, 47 &c.), i.e. it lays emphasis only on the material things for the people. It seems to be assumed that if material prosperity or benefits are assured for all, then there is nothing more to be done by the State. The present author feels that the Directive Principles should also have put equal or greater emphasis on moral and spiritual values and should have called upon the State to promote among the people high moral standards, self-discipline, co-operation, sense of responsibility, kindliness, high endeavour. Man is a many-sided being. The satisfaction of mere physical needs is not enough. Man has intellectual, spiritual, cultural and social aspirations also. The socio-economic pattern for the future must be based on the foundation of the best part of our traditions, the rule of dharma, the duties common to all as declared by Manu X. 63 and Yāj. I. 122. A secular state should not and does not mean a godless state or a state that has nothing to do with moral and spiritual values. Prime Minister Nehru himself emphasizes this, when he says 'whether religion is necessary or not, _a certain faith in a worth-while ideal is essential_ to give substance to our lives and to hold us together. We have to have a _sense of purpose beyond the material and physical_ demands of our daily lives' ( in 'Today and tomorrow'p. 8). It may be stated that for most common men and women it is religion that sets worth-while ideals.

The third item in Lincoln's definition is 'for the people'. That is, the Government must look to the good of the people as a whole and not to that of any class or a community in the country. Modern democracy has come to mean parties and it has to work on decisions of the majority. It often happens that, there being several parties, no one party has an absolute majority over all other parties put together, It may often happen that one party secures 40% of the votes actually cast and the other parties (that differ in ideologies) secure, say 25, 20, 15, percent of the votes, then the first party with only 40 percent of the total votes cast rules, though it does not represent the majority of the whole country. The party system generally leads to a struggle for power and lowers the moral standards of the whole people, particularly when hardly one-fifth of the voters (both male and female ) can read and write their own regional language. The present author does not hold that illiteracy necessarily means absence of intelligence. But, unless a man can read for himself and ponder over what he reads, he can hardly be a good judge of the _pros and cons_ in relation to a measure or policy placed before the voters. Besides, the emphasis laid on standards of living without any direct reference to moral and spiritual values has already led to this result that in India the desire for material comforts and positions of power dominates almost every one and there is no corresponding urge or even idea to do one's best for producing goods.

## Spate of legislation in India

The laws are drafted in the English language. Most of the speakers in Parliament use English (a few only speak in Hindi ) and complicated laws are said to have been passed by a majority or unanimously as the case may be. That country may be said to be the best governed which is least governed. There is a spate of legislation in the House of the People. In the seven years from 1950 to 56 nearly 450 laws were passed by the central legislature alone. Some of these laws vitally affect Hindus in their family relations and in other respects. A few examples only can be cited here. The Hindu Adoption Act went far beyond the ancient Hindu principles, which were two viz. that only a male could be adopted for purposes of spiritual benefit to the adopter and the person to be adopted should be in age and other matters like a son. Women could not adopt to themselves but a widow could adopt a son for the spiritual benefit of her husband. These principles have been thrown to the winds as will be seen from the criticisms of the present author above on pp. 1337-1338. But one thing must be mentioned. In some enactments affecting Hindu Law, customs have been abrogated: vide Hindu Marriage Act 25 of 1955, Section 4, Hindu Succession Act 30 of 1956, Section 4 (1). The Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act ( 78 of 1956 ) prescribes that the person to be adopted must not be more than 15 years of age ( section 10 item IV) and that there should be a difference of 21 years between a male adopter and a female adoptee and between a female adopter and a male adoptee (geo. 11 items iii and iv). But the provision in Sec. 10 is made subject to a custom to the contrary. It passes one's understanding why custom was allowed to prevail over the law in this case. The Hindu Marriage Act, 25 of 1955, has made sweeping changes of which the vast majority of Hindus are blissfully ignorant. Before the Act a Hindu could in theory (and rarely in practice ) have two or more wives living at the same time and even an _anuloma_ marriage (i.e, the marriage of a male of a higher varṇa with a woman born in a lower varṇa ) was held to be invalid by some High Courts in India such as those of Allahabad and Madras. Now under the present Hindu Marriage Act of 1955 the marriage is a monogamous marriage ( section 5) and a person belonging to any caste may marry a woman of any caste how highsover or lowsoever she may be by caste; and further marriages between spouses belonging to the Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist or Jaina religions are now declared valid. It was suggested, while the marriage Bill was in the Committee stage, that the provision as to monogamous marriages should become compulsory when a similar provision would be made applicable to Muslims ( who under the Koranic law can have four wives at the same time ). But this was brushed aside through fear of antagonizing Muslims. Other provisions about Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs being Hindus for the purposes of the Marriage Act, being a sweeping one at one stroke, is likely to be resented by almost all illiterate Hindus and likely to lead to tension and bitterness in many rural families and to break-up of the family as a central and compact unit in Hindu society. The orthodox people do not like such mixed marriages. It is not unlikely that the orthodox sections in the country may join hands with the ignorant masses and set back the hands of the clock, when some years hence the ranks of the towering personalities of the Gandhi era whom people want to humour have become thin.[^2640]

[^2640]: Vide what Mr. Frank Moraes says (on p. 85) in his biography of the Prime Minister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru (1956) about people being anxious to humour him.

## Far-reaching changes in Hindu Law

One of the outstanding characteristics of Hindu society for several millennia has been the joint family system of the Mitākṣarā type which prevails in the whole of India (except in Bengal which is under the Dāyabhāga system ). Its peculiarity is that all male members in the family form a coparcenary, that if any male of the family dies his interest devolves by survivorship on the remaining male members including his own male issue, if any, that females have no rights in the family property except marriage expenses and maintenance and no member of the joint family could transfer any part of the family property by will(not even the father) or by sale or mortgage except for certain recognised family necessities. This joint family system and the caste system were the bulwarks that kept together Hindu Society for centuries, inspite of foreign invasions and misrule. The Hindu Succession Act ( 30 of 1956 ) makes two sweeping changes in the Mitākṣarā joint family system. The explanation to Section 30 of the Act provides that any male Hindu may dispose of by will his interest in the coparcenary property. This is one drastic change. A similar drastic change was made by section 6, its proviso and explanation read together. Briefly it comes to this. If a Hindu coparcenar of the Mitākṣarā system dies after the Succession Act comes into force, leaving him surviving no son, but a daughter or the daughter of a predeceased son or the son of a predeceased daughter or daughter of a predeceased daughter, his interest in the coparcenary property will not pass by survivorship to the other surviving male members of the coparcenary but to the above mentioned descendants of his and the interest that would pass to these descendants would be the share in the coparcenary property that would have been allotted to him if partition of the coparcenary property had taken place immediately before his death. Before this Act, the daughter or the other heirs mentioned above would have got nothing in the coparcenary property when any male member of the family died sonless. These two changes make of the joint family of the Mitākṣarā type a mere shell. It was suggested when the Bill was before Parliament that Parliament should provide that the joint family system of the Mitākṣarā type has been abrogated and that all members of the joint family after the passing of the Act would be only tenants-in-common. But this was not done. Why the Minister in charge or the members of Parliament felt squeamish about ending the copercenary system of the Mitākṣarā is not clear to the present author. It looks like straining at a goat while swallowing a camel. These and other changes in the old Hindu Law are possibly motivated by the desire to do justice to the rights of women. But in some cases this is done with a vengeance. For reasons of space only one example of this type is cited. Under Section 8 of the Hindu Succession Act and the Schedule of heirs in class I and class II, if a man dies possessed of property leaving only his mother and father (and no sons or wife or other persons ) the mother will take the whole estate of her son absolutely to the entire exclusion of the father, since the mother is placed among heirs of class I., while the father is placed in class II and the rule in Sec. 8 (a and b) is that heirs put in class II succeed only if there is no heir in class I. Under Yāj. II, 135 the order of heirs to a man dying without male issue is first the widow, then daughter, then daughter's son or sons, then parents (_pitarau_, the dual is used). Some commentators held that the mother is to be preferred as heir to the father, others held that the father is to be preferred to the mother, while still others held that both parents should succeed together. In the Council of States (Rajyasabha) the father was put in class I along with the mother, but in the House of the People the mother was put in class I and the father was put as heir in class II. Article 15 of the Constitution prohibits discrimination on the ground of sex, religion, race &c. What difference can be made between the mother and the father of a man as heirs except on the ground of sex? Probably, the legislators wanted, in however small a way, to compensate women for past injustices to them. The Hindu Law of Succession of 1956 goes even beyond Muslim Law in that it recognizes twelve categories of persons (in class I of Schedule) as entitled to succeed simultaneously and take the property of the deceased. In a few Cases it is possible that the heirs of class I taking the estate of a deceased person may be twenty or even more, if the latter leaves five sons and five daughters, besides some children of predeceased sons and daughters. There is probably no country in the world where so many persons are entitled to succeed simultaneously to a deceased person's estate. The result would be that there would be great fragmentation of property and constant wrangles and litigation. This amounts to distribution of poverty. Under the Hindu Law before 1956 women as heirs to males took as a general rule a limited estate ( i.e. a life estate ). For example, if a man died leaving his wife and a brother or a brother's son (but no children ) his widow would take a limited estate i.e. on the widow's death, the estate would go to the brother (if alive ) or to the latter's sons &c. Now (after 1956 ) the widow would take an absolute estate and she would be able to dispose of it as she pleased ( by sale, gift or will ). Vide Section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act of 1956. Not only this, that section has retrospectively conferred an absolute estate on the widows who succeeded as limited owners before 1956. Suppose a person died in 1950, leaving a widow and a brother. The widow would take only a limited estate and she could not sell it or will it away; if she died before 1956 the husband's brother would have succeeded to the estate. But suppose she is alive and in possession of her husband's estate when the Act of 1956 was passed. Her estate is at once enlarged. She can donate it to any one or leave it by her will to her own brother and entirely destroy the expectancy of the husband's brother to succeed to her husband's estate. This is equality of women with a vengeance. The mass of people know nothing about this at present. But when many cases come before the courts and the common people come to know the present law whereby the expectancies of male members of her husband's family are set at naught by the widow transferring the property to persons that are strangers there is bound to be great trouble. Of all the revolutionary changes in India none will have more pervading influence and meaning than the drastic changes in the legal status of women made by the laws affecting Hindus passed from 1954 to 1956, which enforce monogamy, make polygamy punishable, which provide the minimum ages for the marriage of women and men at 15 and 18 respectively, which allow divorce to both sexes on the same basic rules, which confer rights of inheritance and absolute ownership on a daughter and her children, that allow the husband or the widow of a person, if the deceased had not already adopted a son and a daughter before his death, to adopt a son and a daughter.

## Ceilings on land, but no ceiling on immensely rich people

Several States (e.g. Bombay by Act LXVII of 1948, sec. 5) have passed laws putting ceilings on the extent of the holding of lands up to 48 acres or 24 acres according as the land is ordinary or _bagait_ ( irrigated). This is felt by common people as a great injustice, when there is no ceiling on the wealth of big merchants and the like. It may be argued that these very rich people pay income-tax and other taxes. The agriculturists also say that they pay taxes and that inflation has made the price of bare necessities go up.

Before leaving the subject of legislation vitally affecting Hindu society, some remarks will have to be made about the mentality of several Congressmen who appear to have great faith in making men moral by legislation. Article 47 provides that it is among the primary duties of the State to raise the level of nutrition, the standard of living of its people and the improvement of public health and that, in particular, the State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health. The Bombay State and a few other States in India embarked on a policy of total prohibition of intoxicating drinks. If there was to be a total prohibition of intoxicating drinks, it should have been an all India measure. Several States refused to have the prohibition law because there is loss of revenue in two ways, viz, the income from excise duties on liquors is lost and large sums of money have to be spent on establishments for preventing people from manufacturing illicit liquor. Art. 45 about free and compulsory education of children of school-going age (up to 14 years) was not strenuously observed by the Bombay State but it wanted to enforce Art. 47 at all costs. Besides, there being no prohibition on an all India basis, what is an offence under law in the Bombay State is not an offence in Delhi and some other States at all. That takes away the moral basis from the measure. Besides, prohibitionists forget human psychology. When something is prohibited or becomes rare, many feel a fascination in breaking the law or trying to possess what is rare. Illicit liquor produced and kept under the most unhygienic conditions is being sold on a large scale and persons knowing this dare not inform the police for fear of being stabbed or killed by distillers of illicit liquor[^2640a].   

[^2640a]: L. P. Jacks in "Near the brink" remarks 'Social Reform might be defined as the process of creating the social problems of tomorrow by Acts of Parliament designed to solve the social problems of today' (p. 116 ) and on p. 118 he says that he never saw so many drunken people as during the years when prohibition was in force.

A Minister's cook was found engaged in manufacturing illicit liquor. In the present author's opinion prohibition has turned out to be a dismal failure, it tends to corrupt the police, it reduces revenue much needed for development purposes, illicit distillation has become a cottage industry and boot-leggers have acquired a vested interest in prohibition. Why horse-racing and betting are not prohibited by law is inexplicable, except on the supposition that many people entertain that Government is afraid of displeasing rich people who indulge in it. Wine and gambling have been besetting sins from the times of the Ṛgveda. Vasiṣṭha pleads for forgiveness of sins from Varuṇa in Ṛgveda VII. 86.6 saying that 'it is not one's own power that leads one to commit sin, it is fate, wine, anger, dice (gambling) and thoughtlessness'. In Ṛg. X. 34 a gambler laments over his own frailty. Therefore, all that can be reasonably attempted is temperance and reducing the spread of the drinking habit; otherwise new and greater evils not contemplated in the ardour for suppression emerge. Vide p. 1338 above for the warning given against startling changes based on Mr. Aldous Huxley's words. Another faddist attempt at improving morals by legislation is the recent Act prohibiting dowries, which came into force on first July 1961. The giving or taking or abetting the giving or taking of dowry or demanding a dowry directly or indirectly from the parents or guardians of a bride or bridegroom is punishable with imprisonment extending to six months or with fine extending to five thousand rupees or with both. The definition of dowry punishable[^2641] under the act is rendered practically nugatory by the explanation that presents made at the time of a marriage to either party to the marriage in the form of cash, ornaments, clothes or other articles, shall not be deemed to be dowry within the meaning of the section, unless they are made as consideration for the marriage of the said parties. This, instead of relieving the parents of marriageable girls from the payment of a dowry, would give rise to blackmail on the part of busy bodies in the town or the village of the parties. If this latter does not happen the Act will ordinarily remain a dead letter.

[^2641]: The Act defines 'dowry' as 'any property or valuable security given or agreed to be given either directly or indirectly (a) by one party to the marriage to the other party to the marriage or (b) by the parents of either party to a marriage or by any other person, to either party to the marriage or to any other person at or before or after the marriage as consideration for the marriage of the said parties, but does not include dower or Mahr in the case of persons to whom the Muslim Personal Law applies'.

## Starting of Village Panchayats

Article 40 of the Constitution calls upon the State to organize village Panchayats and to endow them with the powers and authority necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government. In ancient and medieval times, village Panchayats played an important part. Under the British this system ( which trained people in democratic functions on a small scale ) was practically done away with. Now after about two hundred years the present Government wants to revive Panchayats. In the different States of India village Panchayat Acts have been passed. Until a large percentage of villagers become educated, self-reliant and men of character, the village Panchayats cannot function as the foundations of real democracy. It is very likely that either the dominant castes or the leading families or the bullies (_guṇḍas_) in the village will capture the village Panchayats and use them for their own benefit. A recent book 'Panchayt-i-raj' by Shri S. A. Dey (published by Asia Publishing House, 1961 ) paints a very roseate picture of Panchayats functioning in the 550 thousand villages of India. It all depends on disinterested workers of high character; otherwise this project will meet the same fate that overtook Brayne's work in Gurgaon after Brayne left.

Some people took it into their heads to decide that agricultural land should belong to him who tilled it. Therefore, in Bombay and some other States legislation was enacted, first holding that he who tilled another's land for six years was to be regarded as a 'protected tenant' (i.e. practically a permanent tenant); later on the owner was prohibited from selling the land to a non-agriculturist and ultimately (by Bombay Act. LXVII of 1948, sec.32 ) the tenant was made the owner, being liable to pay to the original owner the price fixed by the Revenue authorities spread over twelve yearly instalments. Whatever may be the case in Zamindaris, in the Deccan and some South Indian States the Ryotwari system prevails and persons belonging to the lower middle class purchased lands at high prices (not getting more than three or four percent as rent on the money invested ) as land was deemed a stable investment. The present author, having been a practising lawyer for forty-five years, knows personally thousands of village people. In many cases although four or five years have passed away, the Revenue authorities have not yet decided the prices of the lands over which ownership of erstwhile tenants has been declared. Most of the erstwhile tenants ( now become owners ) have not paid a pie for four years and the real owners have been robbed of the benefit to be derived from the price, if paid. Supposing Government was solicitous of increasing production by making tenants owners there is no reason why Government should not have recovered the price or instalments as a revenue demand. There is no judicial probe in the ordinary courts of law, the appeal lies only to the Govt.(that means to the Collector), no owner is entitled to engage a pleader ( sec. 80 A) and very complicated provisions are made if the former tenant fails to pay each instalment. But the present state of things is sheer spoliation and looks like robbing Peter to pay Paul and is a sample of what democracy might mean to people of the lower middle class. There is no evidence that by these measures production of food grains has greatly increased. But Congressmen are complacent because they know that in the elections the vast majority of illiterate agriculturists who are to benefit by such legislation will cast their votes in favour of 'oxen' adopted as symbol by the Congress party. Many States have introduced by legislation ceilings in land holdings, viz. no man or family is to hold more then 48 acres of dry land and no more than 24 acres of irrigated land. Even agriculturists have now begun to grumble and to ask why no ceilings are placed on the accumulation of wealth, when they see rich people flaunting their wealth in cars eighteen or twenty feet in length, obstructing narrow roads and causing serious casualties[^2642]. Most people complain that the poor are getting poorer and the rich richer under the policies of the present Government. Government is not able to hold the price line and agriculturists, workers in industries and the lower middle class are dissatisfied and there is great danger of communistic ideas spreading among the majority of the inhabitants of this ancient land, that once honoured sages. Prime Minister Nehru said on the Congress manifesto for the elections of 1962 [^2643] 'If the great majority of people in India for some reason or other become communists in the sense of thinking that way, it may be good or bad, I do not know, but I am quite convinced it would not be India, then it would be something else. I do not want that to happen, even though I want India to take up modern scientific techniques, scientific theories, economic theories, economic organizations. I accept all that to the extent it is good for India. It is for us to choose, I do not rule out any-thing but I rule out being uprooted from India'.

[^2642]: A survey carried on by the Police authorities for some months in Greater Bombay (population 41 lakhs) this year disclosed that motor accidents on an average caused one death every day, 13 people were injured and several dozens of accidents occurred every day in which motor cars were involved but no man was killed or injured.

[^2643]: Quoted in Prof. V. K R. V. Rao's paper in 'Changing India' p. 241 in the Volume of papers presented to Prof. D. R. Gadgil on his 61st birth-day.

## What is Socialistic pattern of society

What is ordinarily meant by 'Socialism' is collective farming, the abolition of the private ownership of the means of production and State Industrialization. Merely saying that the land should go to the tiller and carrying out that by legislation is simply robbing one person to benefit another. It is a long way off from that to socialist farming which would make the tiller a landless worker on the collective farm.

It is often said that ours is a 'Welfare State' and that what is aimed at is a 'socialistic pattern of society'. The Constitution does not employ these very words. But Art. 38 appears in substance to mean that India would be a Welfare State, as it provides 'The State shall _strive to promote the welfare of the people_ by securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in which justice, social, economic, political, shall inform all the institutions of the national life.' In the report of the Planning Commission on the 2nd Five Year Plan (which was accepted by the Government ) the meaning of 'socialistic pattern of society' is set out as follows : [^2644]

The task before an underdeveloped country is not merely to get better results within the existing framework of economic and social institutions, but to mould and refashion these so that they contribute effectively to the realization of wider and deeper social values. These values or basic objectives have recently been summed up in the phrase 'socialist pattern of society'. Essentially this means that the basic criterion for determining the lines of advance must not be private profit, but social gain and that the pattern of development and the structure of socio economic relation should be so planned that they result not only in appreciable increase of national income and employment but also in greater equality in incomes and wealth.'

[^2644]: Vide p. 9 of a draft outline of the 2nd Five Year Plan pub. by the Planning Commission in February 1956.

Major decisions regarding production, distribution, consumption and investment must be made by agencies informed by social purpose. The benefits of economic development must accrue more and more to the relatively less privileged classes of society and there should be progressive reduction of the concentration of incomes, wealth and economic power. The problem is to create a _milieu_ in which the small man who has so far had little opportunity of perceiving and participating in the immense possibilities of growth through organized effort is enabled to put in his best in the interest of a higher standard of life for himself and increased prosperity for the country. It appears from this and from what follows that 'socialist pattern of society' is not to be regarded as some rigid or fixed pattern. It is not rooted in any doctrine or dogma.

A booklet published by Sriman Narayan for the All India Congress Committee (2nd ed. of 1956, New Delhi) embodies the notable speeches of the Prime Minister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. He starts by saying that private enterprise is useful so far as our country is concerned, that we wish to encourage it, but the dominance which private enterprise had throughout the world during a certain period is no more and that for a planner it has now a secondary place. Later on (p. 2 ) he states that he uses the word 'socialistic picture of society' _as meaning largely that the means of production should be socially owned or controlled for the benefit of society as a whole_. On p. 12 he says ( at Avadi Session )'we have laid down that certain basic industries must necessarily be state-owned and there are other industries we should try to encourage the State to start. The plan is an integrated whole and in that integrated whole the public and private sector must also be integrated. They are not rival shows.' On p. 19 he says 'The national aim is a welfare state and a socialistic economy.' 'Finance is important, but not so much as people think.'. What is important is trained personnel. The only thing we have to guard against is inflation. 'Inflation is avoided if there is production corresponding to the money thrown in'. (p. 20 ). "Everyone in the country should have the primary things of life like food, clothing, housing, education, sanitation, medical help, employment, work" (p. 27). "The objectives of India's Planning should be socialistic pattern of society. It cannot be achieved by mere legislation; but it is all a question of planning" (pp. 30-31 ).  

## Vague language about Socialistic pattern

'Both Congress and Parliament have said that we want a socialistic pattern of society'. _Why have we used this vague language? We have done so deliberately because we do not want to commit ourselves to any rigid formula_' (p. 55). 'India wants a social revolution by peaceful means, peaceful methods, by mutual agreement, by working together. Hard work is the only way to progress.' Russia had to use force to do in 20 or 25 years what England did in 100 years ( pp. 60-66 ).

These quotations taken from the speeches of the Prime Minister clearly establish that he does not want a totalitarian communism in India. He appears to favour a democratic socialistic pattern. But he himself admits that vague language about socialistic pattern has been deliberately used and that his idea is to build up in India by trial and error a sort of democratic socialism. But there is great danger in this. The present author is not aware of any large country in the world where a democratic socialistic pattern purposely clothed in vague language has been tried and succeeded. The language being vague and no definite procedure being chalked out, a socialistic pattern would mean all things to all men and the socialistic pattern of society is vague enough to allow diverse interpretations.

Russia and China have been and are under totalitarian socialism. In Soviet Russia under Lenin and Stalin peasants, working men and intellectuals became statesmen and military commanders, the old economic principle of supply and demand was replaced by central control of all commercial relations, of all production and distribution among the large populations of Russia spread over vast areas, individualistic agriculture gave place to huge co-operative farms managed under the directives of the State, aristocracy and democracy were abolished and dictatorship of a party that monopolized all power emerged. Our leaders appear to have borrowed the ideas of co-operative farming and the State control of production and distribution of several commodities from the Russian example, but the present writer is afraid that without the coercive methods employed by dictators like Stalin, our experiments will not in a measurable period of time lead to the results desired and expected by our leaders.

Those interested in democratic socialism may profitably read Shri Ashok Mehta's work on it (published by Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1959).

What appears to the present author is that our country is to have a mixed economy, in which private and public enterprise are supposed to work together to narrow the disparity or gulf between a small minority of haves and a vast multitude of have-nots. For example, Atomic energy, Railways, iron and steel, aircraft, ship-building are among Government industries, while the private sector is to be concerned with the manufacture of textiles, cement, aluminium, machine tools, chemicals and pharmaceuticals &c.

The present writer does not think that he is competent enough to criticize the means and methods that are being adopted by the leaders of the country and to say whether they are enough to meet the high promises made and the hopes raised by certain Articles in the Constitution such as 39 ( part a of which declares that the citizens have the right to an adequate means of livelihood ), 41 (providing for securing the _right to work, to education and to public assistance in cases of un-empluy ment, old age, sickness and disablement_), 43 (the State _shall_ endeavour to secure to all workers, agricultural, industrial or otherwise, _work, a living wage, decent standard of life_ and full enjoyment of leisure and social and cultural opportunities ); vide Articles 45 and 47 already quoted above (on pp. 1669, 1675)

But he will say a few words. The mass of people cannot be kept at a high level of self-sacrifice, great ideals and hard work for long. A dynamic and revered leader like Buddha may succeed for a time in securing this. But, when he passes away, there is gradually a relapse into conditions worse than what they were before. For the vast majority of people anywhere private gain is the chief motive for hard work and not mere requests or sermons. If that motive is abolished, then the majority will not work hard at all, though a few individuals of high ideals and moral character may work as hard as before. Or there will have to be a dictatorship, coercion and fear of being liquidated. In the absence of these, production will be enormously reduced and there will be no improvement in standards of living. Russia and China are not under a Parliamentary democracy and they can therefore make people work without trammels, but in countries like U. K., U. 8. A., even Japan the appeal of the motive of private gain is the chief factor.

## Inequalities of income in U.S.S.R.

Even in Russia incentives have to be held out for extra work and it is admitted that even after forty years of totalitarian rule, there are great-inequalities of income, since the wages of an Academician and an average worker are in the ratio of 62:1, and ( apart from academicians) the wages of high-placed executives and common men are in the ratio of 20:1 and there are no ceilings on income. [^2646] Shri Vinoba Bhave placed his target about Bhūmidāna at fifty million acres but he got only about five million acres, half of which are not arable. Now the emphasis has shifted to 'Sarvodaya'. Shri Jayaprakash Narayan, who was first a Marxist out and out, then joined the P. S. Party, is now advocating the principles of 'Sarvodaya' in [^2647] 'Towards a new society' published by Mr. Prabhakar Padhye for the Congress for cultural freedom (New Delhi, 1958). Sarvodaya planning seems to be based on the assumption that a radical change in human behaviour and attitude to work and property will take place on a large scale without coercion. There is hardly any basis for any such assumption at present. The Prime Minister himself admits (vide p. 240 of Prof. V. K. R. V. Rao's paper in 'Changing India ') that adequate motives and inducements have to be provided. The Indian Government more than any other purely democratic country in the world has extended the scope of public administration to embark on the production and distribution of economic goods while keeping at the same time full Parliamentary democracy. Gandhiji also called upon the millionaires to hold their vast fortunes in trusteeship. One should like to know the names of even a dozen millionaires in India that dealt with their wealth like trustees even in Gandhiji's lifetime.

[^2646]: Vide 'The Democratic alternative' (p. 16) by Miss M. A. Devaki, published in 1959 by the Indian Committee for Cultural Freedom, Bombay.

[^2647]: Sarvodaya ideal is not different from the well-known verse 'सर्वेऽव सुखिनः सन्तु सर्वे सन्तु निरामयाः । सर्वे भद्राणि पश्यन्तु मा कश्चिद् दुःखमाप्नुयात् ॥' which means 'May all here (in this world) be happy, may all be free from diseases. May all see prosperity and may no one experience sorrow'.

Let us now turn to the third Five Year Plan.[^2648] The vital objectives of the planners are stated on p.9. 'Rapid economic growth and expansion of employment, reduction of disparities in income and wealth, prevention of the concentration of economic power, and creation of the values and attitudes of a free and equal society. Where the bulk of the people live so close to the margin of poverty, the claims of social justice, the right to work, of equal opportunity and of a minimum level of living have great urgency'. On p. 48 the principal aims are further elaborated and it is stated on p. 49 that the first priority belongs to agriculture and therefore the total outlay provided is 1718 crores of rupees as against 950 crores in the Second Plan and fertilizers to the extent of 800,000 tons are provided for as against 110,000 tons in the 2nd Plan.

Our country's great handicap is population and food production. Statistics for the growth of population[^2649] are (in millions ): 1901 (235.5), 1911 ( 249 ), 1921 ( 248.1), 1931 ( 275.5), 1941 ( 314.8), 1951 (356.9), 1961 ( 138 ). This indicates that by about 1966-1967 the population of our country may be about 480 millions. Article 39a ( referred to on p. 1666 ) requires the State to direct its policy towards securing that every citizen has the right to an adequate means of livelihood. Our country has been an agricultural country from time immemorial, yet we have to import millions of tons of wheat and other grain for feeding our large population. The finance minister in his speech on the Budget for 1961-62 states (p. 79 para 36 ) that in May 1961 an agreement under P. L. 480 was signed by Ivdia's minister with the U. S. A. for the import in four years of 18 million tons of wheat, one million tons of rice and also certain quantities of maize, cotton, tobacco and soya bean oil. This is the biggest agricultural commodities agreement ever signed between two countries. There were four previous agreements commencing from August 1956 but they were all on a lesser scale. The fifth agreement of May 1960 was for agricultural commodities worth 1369.8 million dollars ( = 655.8 crores of rupees ). The average intake of food in India is below the nutritional standards laid down by scientists. Ours is one of the poorest countries in the world as the following table [^2650] for national income _per capita_ for 1957 will show :

[^2648]: 'Third Five Year Plan'. published by the Government of India, Planning Commission, 1961 ( 774 pages). While these pages were passing through the press the author came across a book called 'Planning in India' by Mr. V. T. Krishnamachari ( Orient Longmans, 1961 ) who was a member of the Planning Commission from March 1950 and Deputy Chairman from February 1953 to June 1960. It is a valuable book based on official information and containing numerous tables and details. It requires to be carefully studied and invites criticism, but that cannot be done in this place now.

[^2649]: Vide Tata Industries 'Statistical Outline of India for 1959', Table 8 for population.

[^2650]: Vide Tata Industries 'Statistical outline of India for 1959', Table No. 2. Vide 'Communist China today' by S. Chandrasekhara. (p. 136), who shows that the present figures about China are not reliable owing to a change of policy in modern China.

Very low per capita income in India

Country       Rupees          Country       Rupees
India         289             Italy         1922
Australia     5114            Japan         1200
Burma         222             U. K.         4561
Canada        4946            U.S.A.        10124
Ceylon        553             W. Germany    3530

These figures show that in Ceylon the per capita income is double that of India, in Japan it is four times as much and in Germany over twelve times that of India. Both Germany and Japan were devastated by the 2nd World War and yet the people of both countries have in less than 15 years improved so much in production that both are giving substantial assistance to India. Our people and leaders should deeply ponder over this state of things and should strain every nerve in an all out effort to improve the country's lot instead of talking and mutual bickerings.

While these pages were passing through the Press, the author got a copy of 'India's Food Crisis and steps to meet it" which is a report (of 254 pages) made in 1959 by a Ford Foundation Team of thirteen American Technicians and agriculturist specialists at the invitation of two Indian Ministers of Food and Agriculture and Community Development and co-operation. It is a very important document, discusses seventy aspects of the problem and deserves close study by all Indians interested in India's welfare. It is issued by the Govt. of India. One or two striking matters can alone be referred to here. The report points out that the total population of India will be about 480 millions at the end of the Third Five Plan in 1966, that the target of 110 million tons of food grains by 1965-66 is reasonable and is necessary to provide food enough for the added millions and to provide for some dietary improvement and a safety margin for poor crops and other emergencies. The report recognises that India is making steady progress in food production, but the rate of production must be tripled to meet the Third Plan target. It gives the warning that if India's food production increases no faster than at present rates, the    _gap between supplies and target will be 28 million tons_ by 1965-66; this would be 25 per cent shortfall in terms of need and that no conceivable programme of imports or rationing would meet a crisis of this magnitude ( pp. 3-4). The report suggests several emergency measures and measures to be carried on over a long period, which cannot be set out here. It stresses the need for research in agricultural economics. It recommends (p. 11 ) that the entire nation must be made aware of the impending food crisis and steps must be taken to meet it and warns that adequate supplies of food are essential to the survival of democracy. Two short-comings of the report may be pointed out. It does not tell us what funds would be required for research and for implementing the numerous other suggestions it makes. Besides, it says nothing about the birth rate in India and measures to curb the phenomenal rise in population.

## Comparative birth rates and death rates

According to U. N. Demographic Year book (August 1960 ) there are about 2900 million people in the world. More than half of the world's inhabitants live in four countries viz. China ( 669 millions ), India ( 438 millions), Soviet Union (209 millions ), U. S. A. ( 178 millions ). Population growth depends upon the birth rate and the death rate. Owing to scientific discoveries, epidemics or such diseases as malaria, typhoid, cholera, influenza are either eliminated or brought under control and therefore the death rate tends to be lower and lower. It is the birth rate that has to be controlled. The following table[^2651] for comparative birth rate and death rate in 1957 for eight countries is interesting :

Country       Birth Rate per thousand.      Death rate per thousand.
India               24                              12
Australia           23                               9
Canada              28                               8
Ceylon              37                              10
France              19                              12
Sweden              15                              10
U. K.               17                              12
U. S. A.            25                              10

[^2651]: Vide table 12 'Comparative vital statistics, 1957' in the Tata Industries 'Statistical Outline of India, 1959'.

This table shows that the birth rate in our country is not very high or abnormal and the death rate is also similar to that of such progressive countries as France and U. K. Many Western countries have no definite population policy at Govt. level. But the case of our country is entirely different. Our country has already a huge population, most of which is on the margin of subsistence level. Supposing that by means of our two Five Year Plans the national income in the ten years (1951–1961 ) increased 30 percent, the growth of population in the same period would come to about 22 percent, so that most of the additional wealth produced would be eaten up by the new mouths that have to be fed and the standard of living of the average Indian would practically remain the same. Therefore, the main problem that faces the Government, the planners and the people is how to control the large growth of population. Population control will not solve all the problems of our country, but our other problems will not be solved without solving that problem. The Government of India and the Planners had no well thought policy about the control of population, Government appears to lay far more emphasis on industrialization and agricultural production than on population control. In the first Five Year Plan only 65 lakhs of rupees were allocated to the schemes of population control, in the 2nd Five Year Plan the allocation was raised to five crores. The Planning Commission has now realized the gravity of the problem of the enormous growth of Indian population, has provided 50 crores of rupees in the Third Plan for the various schemes of population control ( vide pp. 676 ff. of Third Five Year Plan). In the whole world about 100 people are born every minute, about 6000 persons every hour, about 140,000 every day and about five crores every year. This problem of the phenomenal growth of population Overshadows in urgency and importance almost every problem of the contemporary world, much more so of India. Very little is being done to control systematically the terrific growth of numbers. Sweden in the early 19th century was a poverty stricken country, but now it is one of the progressive and prosperous countries of the world owing to hard work, co-operation, honesty, social and personal discipline. Birth control is a very difficult and delicate problem. Religious beliefs and prejudices have to be taken into consideration. In Ṛgvedic times the prayer to God Indra for a newly married bride had been 'bountiful Indra! may ten sons be born of her and make her husband the eleventh (member of the family).' Later on some kindly soul took compassion on women and made the blessing to be 'of eight sons'. The Mahābhārata said that a sonless man does not reach blessed worlds (heaven &c). By the birth of a son the father was deemed to have discharged his debt to his ancestors and the water and piṇḍas ( balls of cooked rice ) offered by the son to his deceased father and other deceased ancestors were supposed to be of great efficacy for the peace of the departed souls, Vide H. of Dh. Vol. II pp. 560-61, 799 and above p. 1626 This importance of a son or sons is believed to this day by almost all illiterate or educated people in India except a few men and women of advanced views. Educated brides sometimes request that the old mode of blessing for eight sons should not be followed. Therefore, in such cases the formula has to be changed to 'may you have as many sons as you desire'. The Smṛtis lay down that the husband has to cohabit with the wife after the first few days of her monthly illness and that he incurred the sin of embryo murder if he refused to do so without good cause. Vide H. of Dh. Vol. II pp. 570-71 and note 1327. The Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa (Chap. 14. 5-6 ) goes a little further and gives a story in which the husband who neglected this owing to his partiality for another charming wife had to undergo torments of hell.

## Birth control by contraceptives etc.

The present high prices of the necessaries of life induce many people to limit families by various devices. The Planning Commission is going to try various measures such as intensive education, provision of facilities and advice on the largest scale possible, providing family planning services at 1864 rural and 330 urban medical and health centres, numbers of sterilization centres, opening 6100 clinics in rural areas and 2100 in urban areas ( in 2nd Plan only 549 urban and 1100 rural clinics ), distribution of simple contraceptives, research programme for more effective contraceptives etc. The 3rd Plan reports that in the 2nd Plan period 125000 sterilization operations were carried out (p. 678 of Third Plan). The present author is not an expert in these matters and so will content himself by pointing out that sterilization and, particularly contraceptives, are double-edged Weapons. Sterilization for males is easy and may become popular among well-to-do men for selfish reasons (such as not wanting children and not undertaking the task of bringing them up). Therefore, a rule would have to be made and rigorously enforced that no sterilization will be done unless the man has three children or more. Vide a very thoughtful work 'Fertility and Survival' by Alfred Sauvy tr. from French by Christine Brooke-Rose (1961). Birth control is practised in West Europe, North America, Japan exclusively by the well-to-do type of people. The same might happen in India. The most serious objection against contraceptives is that they will lead to immorality and encourage promiscuity in both sexes, Gandhiji in his 'Self-restraint versus self-indulgence' (3rd. ed., 1928) stated that so far as India is concerned there is no case for contraceptives (p. 3) and advised self-restraint. But he might have changed his opinion if he had been alive today. To advise poor people to practise self restraint, when most of them live in hovels of one room or two rooms, who are uneducated and have no ambitions and pass life in abject poverty, sounds to them as a huge joke. The well-to-do have many interests in life and several outlets for their energy but for the poor there are very few. It is interesting to note that the Prime Minister in his 'Autobiography'( 1936 ) strongly criticizes Gandhiji's praise of poverty, suffering and ascetic life as utterly wrong, harmful and impossible of achievement ( p. 510 ) and regards Gandhiji's attitude to sex as extraordinary (p. 512 ).

Dr. Radhakrishnan in 'Religion and Society'(published in 1947 ) concedes (p. 189) that the use of contraceptives cannot be altogether forbidden, quotes Dawson to the effect that birth control by abstention is either ineffective or, if effective, pernicious (p. 90 ), that objections to birth control by contraceptives are due to their abuse and that in the present conditions facilities for birth control must be available, especially to poorer classes (p. 191 ). Contraceptives would have to be harmless to use, cheap, easy to use and absolutely reliable. The author is not sure if there are contraceptives of this type. Japan, a small country of islands, was compelled by the rapid growth of population to legalise abortions. Vide 'Aggression and Population' by F. James Dawson (London, 1946 ) for a thoughtful book on how to check worldwide growth of population. A thoughtful and exhaustive work is 'Population and planned parenthood in India' by S. Chandrasekhar, Director of Indian Institute for population studies, Madras ( revised Edition of 1961 ).

The total investment programme for the Third Plan comes to Rs. 10400 crores (p. 109 ), Ra. 6100 crores in the public sector and Rs. 4300 crores in the private sector. The public sector has to find Rs. 7500 crores in all (that is Rs. 6300 for investment plus 1200 crores for current outlays in personnel &c( p. 91).

Resources for the Third Plan (p.100)

              TABLE 3.
                                            CENTRE      STATES      TOTAL

1. Balance from current revenue               410         140         550
2. Contribution of Railways                   100         ---         100      
3. Surpluses of other public enterprises      300         150         450
4. Loans from the public                      475         325         800
5. Small Savings                              213         387         600
6. Provident funds                            183          82         265
7. Steel Equalisation Fund                    105         ---         105
8. Balance of miscellaneous capital receipts  428         258         686
9. Total of 1 to 8                           2214         826        3040  
10. Additional Taxation                      1100         6100       1710
11. External Assistance                      2200          --        2200
12. Deficit financing                         524          26         550
                                            -------------------------------
                                  Total  ... 6038        1462        7500
                                            -------------------------------
Besides the States have resources for 3rd Plan amounting to 1416 crores.

The two five year plans have given our leaders a certain mastery over the situation and some confidence abut the future. But Mr. Nanda has to admit that the productivity and level of efficiency are very low. Foreign aid raises difficult questions as to how to match it with an adequate mobilization of domestic resources. The mass of people are poverty-stricken, have a low standard of living and therefore can save little. High prices, which is a concomitant of development plans in all countries, are making common people discontented.

Foreign assistance runs into thousands of crores of rupees, nearly half of which comes from U. S. A. The United States Information Service has prepared a detailed statement of assistance to India for ten years from June 1951 to 4th August 1961 and circulated it to many Indians from which some striking figures are quoted here. A statement brought up only to June 30 of 1961 gives slightly smaller numbers as compared with the statement given below which brings up the figures up to 4th August 1961.

## Extent of U. S. A aid to India

U. S. Government aid consists of grants and loans. Grants are gifts and do not involve any repayment. The grants in ten years total 1128.5 million dollars (537.4 crores of rupees ). Loans involve repayment, some in dollars and some in rupees or dollars at the option of the Indian Government. Repayment in rupees does not involve the utilization of India's foreign exchange earnings or the export of goods from India. Eighty percent of U. S. loans to India up to Aug. 4, 1961 ( 2192.1 million dollars ) are repayable in rupees i.e. that portion of the loans is not so inconvenient as the loans repayable in dollars are.

On p. 110 of Third Five Year Plan the foreign exchange requirements are put down at 2030 crores of Rs. for plan projects. But there are other general needs of the economy by way of raw materials, components, replacement machinery to be provided for. It is estimated that Rs. 3800 crores over the five years would be not too high. On p. 114 it is stated that the total assistance for the Third Plan assured by foreign countries is 2286 million dollars ( Rs. 1089 orores ) out of which the USA has agreed to provide 1045 million dollars (just under half of the total foreign assistance), West Germany 425 million dollars, U. K. 250 million dollars, Japan 80 million dollars, and small sums by Canada, France &c.

be not too high that Rs. 3800ement machineromy by way of

    U.S. Aid from the Inception of the Aid Programme to India in June 1951, through August 4, 1961.

                                                                                    DOLLARS     RUPEES
                                                                                    (Milions) (Crores)
Aid under Indo-American technical co-operative programme                              496.4     236.4
Public Law 480, Title I                                                              2337.3    1113.0
Famine Relief grants to Indian Government                                              10.4       5.0
Agricultural commodities distributed through voluntary agencies
(Public Law 480, Title III ).                                                         116.8      53.6
Development Loan Fund                                                                 513.4     244.5
Export-Import Bank                                                                    246.9     117.6
Wheat Loan of 1951                                                                    189.7      90.3
                                                                                    -------------------    
                                                                            Total ...3910.9    1862.6
BREAKDOWN

Grants to Indian Government for economic development (not repayable )                 1128.5    537.4
Famine relief grants to Indian Government ( not repayable )                             10.4      5.3
Agricultultural commodities distributed through voluntary agencies
(PL. 480, title III ) ( not repayable)                                                 116.8     55.6
Loans repayable in dollars                                                             436.6    307.9
Loans repayable in rupees or dollars                                                  1755.6    836.0  
Cooley fund for loans to private enterprises.                                          162.3     77.3
Amounts under PL-480 Title I reserved for US Govt. use.                                300.8    143.1
                                                                                    -------------------      
                                                                            Total ... 3910.9   1862.6
                                                                                    -------------------

## Colossal amount of debts owed by India

The preceding table shows that in the last ten years, India has become indebted to the USA in the huge sum of 2655 million dollars (some payable in dollars alone and the rest in rupees if India chose that way ). In the Third Plan USA has agreed to provide India up to 1045 million dollars i.e. at the end of the 15 years from 1951 India may owe to U.S.A. 3700 million dollars, that is roughly about 1756 crores of rupees (at Rs. 43 per dollar ). India will probably owe a larger amount to all the other lending countries taken together. The most serious question is how and in how many years India will repay the debts that run into astronomical figures. The explanatory memorandum accompanying the Central Budget for 1961-62 shows that India's public debt stood at Rs. 949 crores on 31st March 1939. On the 31st March 1962 it will reach the huge figure of 5554 crores. Adding the liability of Govt. to repay various deposits placed with Govt, under the Post Office Savings Bank, National Plan Savings, Provident Funds, Saving Deposit Certificates etc. which account for Rs. 1868 crores, India's obligations would really come to 7422 crores of Rs. (5554 +-1868), at the end of March 1962. Our interest yielding assets are only Rs. 5725 crores. If we add to this huge sum the debts our Govt. will owe to U. S. A. and other countries as shown in the above table, at the end of the third plan India would be indebted in the colossal figure of about Rs. 11000 crores.

While these pages were passing through the Press, the author received a statement from the USA. Information Service in Bombay, which brings the figures up to 12th March 1962. It states that the American Economic assistance to India from June 1951 to 12th March 1962 totals 4118 million dollars ( = 1960.9 crores of Rupees) as shown in the table below:

                                                    DOLLARS             RUPEES            PERCENTAGE
                                                    (Million)           (Crores)            OF TOTAL
1. Grant ( not repayable )                          1,291.2             614.8                 31.3
2. Loans repayable in dollars.                        608.2             289.6                 14.8
3. Local Currency repayments.                       2,218.0           1,056.5                 53.9
                                                  ----------------------------------------------------  
                                                    4,118.0           1,960.9                100.0
                                                  ----------------------------------------------------  

It is not necessary to go into other details. The loans are repayable at different dates, some being repayable in forty years and some carrying a very low rate of interest. It may, however, be noted that one of about 4000 million dollars aid to India since Independence over half has been in the form of P. L. 480 Food for commodities. The Food Minister of India, Mr. S. K. Patil, assures us, however, that India would become completely self suffcient in food by the end of the Third Five Year Plan and points out that during the last decade, foodgrain production in India rose from 50 to 80 million tons a year, an increase of 60 per cent. But it should not be forgotten that the population of India in the same ten years increased by about 22 per cent over the population in 1951.

The Welfare State theoretically aims at (Sarvodaya) prosperity for all ( at least for the vast majority ). Up to recent times, the main obligations of the State towards its people were the administration of the country, the defence of the country and its coast against aggression or invasion, maintenance of law, and order, primary and higher education. The ambition of the framers of the Indian Constitution and our leaders is to create a welfare state, and to reconstruct the present social and economic order on a socialistic pattern by subjecting the country to a planned economy. Several vital industries are now reported for the State and Government has assumed power to regulate production, to control distribution and to fix even the prices of some commodities absolutely necessary to all men in daily life. It has also established the State Trading Corporation. Taxation has become an ever-increasing instrument of economic policy for carrying out the plan projects. Apart from the income-Tax Act ( XI of 1922 recently consolidated by Act 43 of 1961) our democratic Government passed one after another four Acts, vis. the Estate Duty Act ( XXXIV of 1953), the Wealth Tax ( XXVI of 1957 ), the Expenditure Tax ( XXIX of 1957 ) and the Gift Tar (XVI of 1958). There is no other country in the world that has all the above five taxes. Is India the only welfare country in the world? There is a sense of uncertainty and fright in the middle classes and tax dodging in the rich or influential sections of the community. Reasons of space prevent the citing of illustrations of the arbitrary character of the recent four Acts. In all these Acts the opinions of the Govt. officers (viz. Gift Tax officer, expenditure tax officer, and wealth tax officer and higher officers ) in an executive ladder under the same Acts on questions of fact (such as the value of a property ) are final and cannot be questioned in any court of justice ( i.e, in a subordinate judge's court or district judge's court or High Court). If a creditor releases a debtor from his debts ( wholly or partly ) the creditor will have to pay gift tax on the debt released if the gift tax officer is of opinion that he could have recovered the debt by means of legal steps. No man can make a gift of more than 100 rupees at one time to a private person or even a near relative (except to his wife ) and if he makes several gifts to the same person in one year exceeding five hundred rupees he will have to pay gift tax. In all cases of questions of fact one appeal should have been allowed to a district court or where the amount concerned was more than ten thousand rupees to the High Court. It should be recognized by policy-makers that our people have great faith in the integrity of the High Courts and the district judges who are selected by the High Courts and whose promotion does not depend on the Executive. They have not much faith in the fairness and integrity of Appellate Commissioners and Tribunals that are appointed by the Ministers, when the dispute is between private persons and taxing authorities on behalf of Government. Writers on the constitutions of countries have for many years emphasized two leading features viz. the sovereignty of Parliament and the rule of law.

## The New Despotism

Parliaments are cajoled into passing legislation whereby courts of justice are evaded or passed by and the will or caprice of executive officers becomes unfettered and supreme. This is what is called the 'New Despotism' by Lord Chief Justice Hewart of Great Britain. In the name of the Welfare State it seems that all power is being centralized in bureaucracy by our leaders.

Most common people in India have a very vague notion of what socialism means. They believe that socialism is based on Marxism. [^2652] Marx holds that revolution is the weapon or means by which the workers are to seize power, that his theory is scientific and based on a study of facts. He himself declared that he was no 'Marxist' ( vide. 'Naked God' p. 3 by Howard Fast, New York, 1957 and 'New Class' by Milovan Djilas p. 4 London, 5th Impression, 1958). These words of his are explained by Dr. Radhakrishnan as meaning that he was not pledged to the acceptance of a doctrine, final, complete and oppressive ( vide. 'Religion and Society,' 1947, p. 25). This is not the place to discuss the premises and predictions of Marx, but a few words may be said here. Marx had predicted that communism would prevail first in the most developed and industrialized nations. What happened is quite the opposite of this. Communism occurred in countries like Russia and China that were relatively very much less developed and industrialized.

[^2652]: Vide 'New Despotism' by Lord Chief Justice Hewart (Earnest Benn Ltd, London, 1929) p. 17 (a long passage from which is quoted by R, S. W. Pollard in 'Conscience and liberty' (Allen and Unwin, London, 1940 ). Vide also 'Bureaucracy triumphant' by C. K. Allen ( London, 1931). All these taxing enactments have created a high ladder of officers appointed by the executive. For example, under the Wealth Tax Act there is first the Wealth Tax Officer who decides what tax is payable, then there is an appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner (Sec, 23), then there is a farther appeal to the Appellate Tribunal (Sec. 24 ), then there can be a reference to the High Court on a point of law (Séc. 27-28) and finally an appeal to the Supreme Court (Sec, 29). This is sheer harassment and practical denial of justice. After a private person has run to three different officers or official bodies then only the High Court comes in, if at all, and that too on a point of law. It should be remembered that the wealth tax officer has often to determine the value of properties worth lakhs of rupees and on points of fact there are appeals only to the first officer's superiors and there is no provision for a probe of facts by a court or judicial officer independent of the executive. A similar procedure is provided in the Gift Tax, the Expenditure Tax and Estate Duty Tax.

Another of his predictions was that the system of private ownership would make the rich richer and the poor poorer, would breed ruinous depressions and in the end the angry proletariat would revolt, would overthrow the exploiting classes and establish a communist society. This second prophecy has not materialized in almost all highly industrialized nations. On the contrary, several democratic States have provided security against unemployment, sickness and old age and in some countries employers have admitted representatives of workers into the management of industries. The 'Communist Manifesto' is the official Bible in the U.S. S. R. A recent work The "Anatomy of the Soviet man" by Claus Mehnert, translated from German by Maurice Rosenbaum (1961 ), appears to the present author to contain a balanced and fair estimate of the working of Communism in U. S. S. R. He points out that the desire to rise socially and amass wealth and power is as common to the Soviet Union as to the rest of the world (p. 84 ), that the New Class does not constitute a _bourgeoisie_ in the West European sense, that it is a State _bourgeoisie_, all members work for the State and are dependent on it (p. 73 ), that social distinctions are greater in U.S.S. R. than in U. S. A. (p. 109 ), that the greatest disproportion prevails between the incomes of Academicians, artists and writers on the one hand and ordinary men and workers on the other. It appears to the present author that Communism has so far been the best means for the exploitation of the proletariat.

No great Indian leader of the present day has offered a lucid and considered statement of what the philosophical foundations of Indian socialism are or should be, nor has any leader placed before the people a clear and full picture of the Indian socialistic pattern of the future in all its aspects. In the Plan structures welfare seems to be identified with broad, physical and material comforts. Marx denied God and advocated the forcible liquidation of the exploiting classes. Our Constitution does not mention God (except in schedule II about oaths and affirmations of Ministers and M. P.'s) nor does it emphasize moral and spiritual values, though the founding fathers of the U.S.A. prescribe( in the Declaration of American Independence ) 'All men are created equal. They are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights; among them are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness'. Of course it is wrong and unscientific to say that all men are created equal if literally construed (as even children of the same parents are not equal in height, strength and mental equipment). All that is meant is that all men are equal in the eye of the law or have the same rights before the law.

## No emphasis on truth and non-violence in Constitution

Truth and non-violence are not mentioned in our Constitution, though these were the basic principles from Upaniṣad and Smṛti times ( as in Chāndogya III. 17.4, Manu X, 63, Yāj. I. 122) and for Gandhiji by whom all Congressmen and their leaders swear. Lands of thousands of men of the middle class of small means were taken away from them by changing the fundamental right to property bestowed by Art. 31 (as originally enacted), by preventing recourse to law courts and by giving illusory hopes of some compensation not yet even determined after several years. This may not be liquidation of opponents, yet it is a cruel thing all the same in the name of democracy and Welfare State. [^2653]

Borrowing in the country itself and from foreign countries has been resorted to on an increasing scale.

Table 3 above ( p. 1689-90 ) will convey some idea of the vast amounts of debts our country owes and will owe to U.S. A. and other countries, How and in how many years the nation will be able to pay back these debts with interest is to ordinary men a source of grave anxiety and an insoluble problem. Among the sources for the plan are included Provident Funds, Post Office savings bank accounts, National Plan Certificates &c. These are really debts, though not demandable on any one date or year. Deficit financing which did not form part of the central budget in past years has now become a regular item.

[^2653]: Vide a book called 'Social Welfare in India' issued on behalf of the Planning Commission, Government of India, New Delhi, 1960. People are likely to make a confusion between 'Welfare State' and 'Social Welfare'. The latter phrase refers to more specialized work for the weak or more vulnerable sections of the population (such as women, children, physically handicapped persons like the deaf, dumb and blind, mentally retarded, scheduled castes and tribes and backward classes). A Welfare State wants to change the pattern of life of the whole community or country. Our Constitution in Article 15 (paragraphs 3 and 4 ) authorizes the State to make special provisions for women and children and for the advancement of backward classes, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes and Article 16 para 4 authorizes the State to make provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens. Articles 338-342 deal with the appointment of a special officer for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes and with the appointment by the President of India of a Commission to report on the administration of scheduled areas and scheduled tribes and for specification from time to time of the castes, races or tribes in a list of the scheduled caste, and tribes.

The budget of the central Govt. for 1961-62 exceeds 1023 crores. For 1962-63 the revenues are estimated at 1329.87 crores of rupees and the expenditure at 1381.65 crores of rupees and it is announced that a total deficit of about 150 crores would have to be met partly by additional taxation of 60 crores and 80 lakhs of rupees. It must be remembered that most of these taxes are indirect and the major part of the income from such taxes is due to levies on articles of everyday necessity to common people who are already groaning under high prices of absolutely necessary commodities. The Bombay Government's Budget for 1962-63 intended to tax the poor man's _bidis_ and _gur_ (jaggery). About 7000 crores were put in the State sector in the 1st and 2nd Plan projects and 7500 crores are proposed to be spent in the Public sector in the 3rd plan period. Thus at the end of the 3rd Plan ( in 1965-66 ) Government will have spent about 15000 crores of rupees. Tremendous power will be concentrated in the hands of ministers and the official bureaucracy. It is not generally known how Government has dealt with or will deal with this vast amount, what projects have been undertaken, which of them are completed, the cost of the completed projects, yearly yield from the projects that are completed, steps that are being taken to repay debts and to what extent. There are fervent appeals made by leaders to common people to co-operate with Govt. but the Govt. does not seem to be anxious to take people into confidence by widely circulating through newspapers, press-notes or otherwise information on the above mentioned matters. The vast sums spent on projects have caused inflation, Besides, during the two five year Plans population increased by 77 millions. This accentuated the problem of unemployment and on p. 47 of the book above referred to it is admitted that at the end of 10 years the backlog of unemployment is estimated at nine millions.

Sir W. Beveridge in 'Pillars of Security' (1944) names five giants with which humanity has to struggle viz, want, disease, ignorance, squalor and idleness. (p. 43) The last, that is, unemployment, should be the first point of attack. Art. 41 of our Constitution confers the right to work, to education and to public assistance in case of unemployment, old age, sickness and in certain other cases. It is not easy to give full employment for all. The State must try to limit numbers and provide not merely for literary education but also for vocational and technical training on a very extensive scale. Industrialization is necessary but it is not an unmixed blessing. Discussion of these matters would require far more space than can be afforded in this chapter.

## Dangers of recent public administration

One last word before taking leave of the subjects of Democracy, Welfare State, Socialistic pattern, legislation, planning for social and economic reconstruction. In the new set-up public administrators have become the brains behind the production of economic goods. They have, however, to do in the new sphere work which is entirely different from their traditional work in the Government of former times. Production activity in modern days demands bringing together and coordinating various skills and complex tasks to which administrators in Govt. offices are often strangers. How far they will be able to accomplish the new tasks undertaken by them is a matter which admits of no certain answer. But the most perplexing and baffling question is : Can all-comprehensive national plans under which the State either owns or controls; most aspects of economic activities in Agriculture, Industry and Trade be implemented democratically by Parliamentary control? The present author is very much afraid that the combination of economic and political power in the hands of a few ministers, high ranking officials and politicians would be so overpowering as to reduce the present Parliament (based on universal adult suffrage, only 23 percent of the population being literate ) to a mere shadow and may in some respects at least narrow the liberties of men almost as much as the totalitarian State does.

Let us now turn to the reform and reorganization of Hindu Society and religion. The Portuguese came to India towards the end of the 15th century and acquired some territory on the Western coast of India. But owing to religious intolerance and persecution by them not much impression was made by them on Hindu society. But the case was different with the British, who did not imitate the Portuguese in the matter of religion, but wanted trade, wealth and power. On account of the British rule established over a large part of India from 1765 A. D. Indians came in contact with modern English literature and modern science. The earliest Indian reformer in modern times was a Bengali, Raja Ram Mohan Roy (1772-1833). He founded the Brāhmo Samāja in 1828. Some of the great names in the effort to reorganize and reform Hindu society and religion are those of Devendranath Tagore (1817-1905), Keshub Chandra Sen (1838-1884), Ishvarachandra Vidyasagar, Dayānand (1824-1883 ) who founded the Aryasamāja in 1877 and who regarded only the Vedas as authoritative, Ramakrishna Paramahamsa ( 1834–1886 ) and his great disciple Swami Vivekananda (1863-1902), who founded the Ramkrishna Mission for propagating Vedanta and doing charity work among the poor and the needy, M. G. Ranade ( 1842-1901 ) who was closely connected with the Prārthanāsamāja of Bombay, Agarkar, Phule, Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941 ), Gandhiji (1869 1948 ), Dr. Karve ( who founded the Women's University in 1916). Those interested may usefully read 'A Century of Social Reform' by S. Natarajan (Asia Publishing House, Bombay), G. N. Farquhar's 'Modern religious movements in India '( Macmillan, 1917), W. T. de Bary's 'Sources of Indian Tradition', New York, 1958 ( pp. 604-659 ).

## Several attitudes towards changes

There is a great ferment of ideas in India at present. Many of our countrymen, whether young or old, do not derive any inspiration from their religion. It is not the fault of religion, but the fault lies with us and our predecessors who did not and do not exhibit to us the core of our culture and religion, do not sift the essentials and separate them from the unessential accretions due to superstitions and wrong emphasis. Ordinary men of to-day feel bewildered by the disagreements between scientific knowledge and the traditional beliefs. The result is that traditional values and codes of conduct are disintegrating and various views are being bandied about. There are now several distinct thought-forms on matters religious or spiritual. One class calls itself _sanātanis_ whose view is that the traditional codes of conduct and beliefs were established by the all-wise sages of old and therefore modern half-baked reformers have no right at all to introduce changes in them. There is another class ( allied to these ) of those who have studied such modern sciences as eugenics and biology, who oppose change on the ground that our traditions embodied in the caste system and the restrictive rules about marriage are most scientific and no cbange should be made in them and if made disaster will follow. There is another class of people who say 'why do you quarrel with us? Time will bring about all necessary changes'. There are other people who go to the other extreme and deny the existence of any divine or spiritual realities and values in the world. Some believe in the efficacy of laws to introduce desired changes. There are people who say 'take the essential values of Indian culture as foundation and build thereon a structure in keeping with the needs of the times'. Hinduism has always been growing and changing traditions ( vide for examples above pp. 1267-72 and 1471 ). The changes, however, were not brought about by legislation but were the work of commentators and digest-writers, the result being a bewildering variety of laws, customs and usages, religious and spiritual views in different parts of India. India, being always divided into many kingdoms before the advent of the British, there did not exist any legislative authority that could pass laws for the whole of India. Ancient and medieval Dharmaśāstra writers held the view that the king had no authority to interfere with Śāstric rules governing varṇas and castes. Vide H. of Dh. vol. III pp. 98-101 for the proposition that there was almost total absence of legislative power in the king according to Dharmaśāstra writers. Changes in practices and beliefs, however, did take place, but it was learned commentators that by various devices tried to support changes that had already taken place (vide pp. 1267-1272 above). There are really three well-marked classes of people, viz. _Sanātanis_ or no-changers, the iconoclasts and those who want a synthesis of the old and the new.

The question is what should be conserved or discarded from the old practices and what new ideals or values should be added and assimilated. Reasons of space forbid saying much about values here. Values are largely moulded by environment. Only a century or two ago, slavery or racial inequality and pride, sweating children of tender age in factories were accepted in Christian countries as morally neutral or at least not disreputable. But at present some of these, if not all, are generally condemned as immoral. In India also values have changed from time to time. At one time animal sacrifices were quite reputable and of high other-worldly value. Later in the Upaniṣad times _Ahiṁsā_ came to the fore. But there are certain values of our culture that have endured for three thousand years, viz. the consciousness that the whole world is the manifestation of the Eternal Essence, restraint of senses, charity and kindness, Now we are in an age of democracy and the important values of democracy are justice, liberty, equality and fraternity. But unfortunately many of those who sing paeans of democracy in India hanker after power and are in the grip of selfishness and hatred. Lord Acton wrote "All power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely." Kauṭilya said more than two thousand years ago that power warps ( intoxicates ) the mind. Vide H. of Dh. vol. 11. p. 114 and n. 151 for quotations.

Many young men have in these days hardly anything which they believe as worth striving for whatever the cost may be, and hence they have nothing to practise as an ideal. We have to preserve a religious spirit among common men and women, while getting rid of superstitions and beliefs opposed to all science and common sense. It is not the age-old principles of Hindu religion that are at fault, it is modern Hindu society that has to be reorganized, particularly when ours is now a democratic republic; and our leaders must make supreme efforts for many years to preserve equality in the midst of very great economic inequality, liberty which is likely to be overwhelmed by mighty parties and social groups and democracy against demagogues on the one hand and plutocrats on the other.

We must not shut our eyes to the peculiar and formidable difficulties of our country.[^2654] Even the present India (i.e. Bhārat ) is a vast country. There are in present India adherents of eight great religious systems ( Hindu, Buddhist, Jain, Sikh, Moslem, Parsi, Christianity and Judaism ), besides some tribes following none of these, but their own primitive systems; there are different States based on 14 different languages ( mentioned in the 8th schedule to the Constitution of India ), besides six Union territories and about 200 recognized dialects. These are likely to produce movements towards complete provincial autonomy and cultural separation. There are great contrasts among the inhabitants, at one end the primitive tribes and the people who were untouchables and at the other end highly educated men and, in between the two, groups of illiterate people numbering at present about 77 percent of the whole population. _After centuries of conquests by alien people our country has gained independence_.

[^2654]: For a somewhat captious and depressing portrayal of our difficulties by an apparently unsympathetic and unhelpful critic, vide 'India, the most dangerous decades' by Selig S. Harrison (Oxford University Press, 1960), The trend of the whole book is mainly to drive home one point viz. that democracy will not live or be successful in India. The book, it is believed, is mainly intended for non-Indian readers. The author insists too much on the obscurantist tendencies of some Indian people in the matter of caste. If he felt real sympathy and real friendship for the now democracy in India, he should have emphasized the points that make for unity in India, viz. the absence of an organized Church (like Protestant or the Roman Catholic Church ), that Hinduism is a personal religion, that Hindus can easily adapt themselves to the requirements of modern democracy as shown by the three elections held so far without any serious disturbances when there were millions upon millions of voters, men and women. If he really wanted to help the Indian people, he should have stressed matters that favour democracy and not constantly harped on North India and South India, on Hindi and anti-Hindi, many States and language difficulties.

## Our great opportunities for creative thinking and work

This opens for us a new vista of creative thinking and work. We need not give up the basic principles of Hinduism, but should reorientate them to meet new and more complex conditions and work out a changed social order. Everybody says that what is wanted is an emotional integration of Indians and some have suggested that the caste system should be destroyed. If the caste system were a tangible thing it could have been easily and quickly destroyed. But it is not tangible. Legislation cannot destroy it. Only a change of heart with appropriate remedies and vast efforts persistently made over a long period may accomplish this Herculean task and not glib talk by people that hardly ever practise in their lives what they preach. In the present author's opinion States purely on linguistic basis should not have been created at all, but once it was resolved to create them, that should have been strictly adhered to and clear definite principles should have been laid down by the Central Government about assigning border villages to one State or another. The Central Government leadership has been most vacillating in this respect. For example, there were at least five different proposals put forward on Bombay City alone viz. a bilingual state (in which Bombay City was merged), a city State for Bombay alone with separate states of Gujarat and Maharashtra, central administration for five years, a return to the bilingual formula, and lastly separate Maharashtra (including Bombay City, Berar and Marathwada ) and a separate State of Gujarat, with about 200 villages taken over from the Khandesh and Thana districts that had been part of Maharashtra for over one hundred years.

The caste system, the joint family system and the laws of Succession and inheritance that are peculiar to Hindus are really social matters and not religious matters at all. Our Constitution and recent legislation deal with all the three, holding that these are social matters. As shown above, the Constitution abolished untouchability, the Hindu Marriage Act has done away with all prohibitions against marriages between persons of different castes and a Hindu can have marriage relations with any Hindu ( including Buddhist, Jain and Sikh ) and can take any Hindu woman as spouse subject only to the rules of _sapiṇḍa_ relationship and prohibited degrees for marriage. The Hindu Succession Act has practically done away with the joint family system as shown above, though it has not been expressly abrogated.

What is wanted is not mere declamations against the caste system and fervent appeals for emotional integration of all Indians but a comprehensive code or scheme of beliefs and day to day conduct. The present writer cannot enter here into a detailed code or scheme which might require a volume by itself but some concrete proposals if set out here may induce more competent writers to give better and more exhaustive patterns. Let there be churning of thoughts. It is possible that in the beginning one may meet with formidable and fearful difficulties as in the mythological churning of the ocean, but let us hope that, even after the emergence of frightful things, the final result would be blissful, as in the churning of the ocean poison emerged but the whole effort was crowned with the appearance of _amr̥ta_ at the end.

## Emphasis on hard work in Vedic texts

We must not despair of solving our difficult problems. Despair means destruction and death. We must not lose courage by the condition of our country for the last few centuries. We should rather look to our achievements during about three thousand years and take to heart the following advice of ancient sages of the Dharmśāstras such as that of Manu. Manu says (IV.137 )[^2655] 'one should not despise oneself on account of previous failures; one should seek (make efforts for securing) prosperity till one's death and should not regard prosperity as unattainable.' To the same effect is Yāj. when he says 'One should never despise a learned brāhmaṇa, a serpent, a kṣatriya (a king) or oneself; one should desire to secure prosperity till one's death and should not touch (i.e, make public) another's weak points (misdeeds &c.)' We are over 43 crores of people. We are proud of the achievements of our forefathers. If we work hard in a concerted and intelligent effort for years with the sole object of bringing about the highest development of the country and without ambitions of securing individual profit or fame there is no reason why our country should not outstrip or at least equal other countries in the world. The Īśopaniṣad 2 (Vāj. S. 40.2 ) ordains for all common men 'one should wish to live for a hundred years, always doing here ( in this world) actions ( prescribed by the śāstra ).'

[^2655]: नात्मानमवमन्येत पूर्वाभिरसमृद्धिभिः। <u>आ मृत्योः श्रियमविच्छेन्नैनां मन्येत
दुर्लभाम् </u>। मनु. 1V. 137, विप्राहिक्षत्रियात्मानो नावज्ञेयाः कदाचन । <u>आ मृत्योः श्रियमाकाङक्षेन्न </u>कांचिन्मर्मणि स्पृशेत् । या. I. 153.

The Ait. Br. (chap. 33.5), in the story of Śunaḥśepa insists on men being always active and emphasizes that prosperity does not come to him who does not work hard (nānāśrāntāya śrirastiti). So early as the Ṛgveda (IV. 33.11 ) it is emphasized that Gods do not befriend anyone who has not become tired by hard work (na ṛte śrāntasya sakhyāya devāḥ).

In 1934 some persons under the guidance of Swami Kevalānanda Sarasvati of Wai ( Satara District) started a society which later came to be named 'Dharmanirṇaya maṇḍala' [^2656] (society for arriving at definite conclusions on matters of Dharma ). The Swami was a very learned man and a Sannyāsin, did not know English, but he held very modern views. There were fourteen original founder members of whom the present author is one. From 1934 to 1959 eleven sessions attended by hundreds of people were held at Thana, Poona (twice), Lonavla (thrice ), Ahmednagar, Badalapur (Diet. Thana ), Vardha (in Berar), Akolā (in Berar ), Wai and Bombay. At the different sessions resolutions were passed (in all 82 ) on several social and religious matters and a committee was appointed to prepare model _prayogas_ (procedures ) for Sandhyā, congregational (_sāmudāyika_) prayer, _upanayana_, marriage, _antyeṣṭi_ ( funeral rites ), śrāddha, remarriage ( of widows ), re-conversion to Hinduism &c. That Committee prepared under the guidance of Swāmi Kevalānanda such _prayogas_ shorn of unnecessary details and with translations in Marathi, which can be had from Mr. Kokaje of Lonavla. Among the resolutions the following deserve special mention: usages have been changed from time to time by former learned men (śiṣṭas) and the learned men of the present day have the authority to introduce changes in usages as the present circumstances may require; that the untouchability of the people of certain castes be abolished (Art. 17 of the Constitution of India subsequently did this );

[^2656]: The original name was 'तत्त्वनिष्ठ परिवर्तनवादिपरिषद्' (Assembly of people who favoured the making of changes based on some fundamental principles), Seven of the original fourteen members died subsequently viz, Svāmi Kevalādanda, Mahāmahopadhyāya Sridharasāstri Pathak (who became a Sannyāsin under the same Śhaṅkarananda-bhārati), Sadāsivaśāstri Bhide, Dr. K, L. Daftari, Mr, J. S. Karandikar (editor of the Poona 'Kesari' newspaper), Mr. C. M. Saptarshi (Advocate, Ahmednager) and Prajñāneśvarayati, Tarkatīrtha Raghunāthaśāstri Kokaje of Lonavla (Dist. Poona) was the Secretary. Among the other original members are Mr. N. G. Chapekar (a nonagenarian, retired First Class Subjudge), a scholar of wide reading including Vedic literature, Dharmaśāstras, sociological studies and Tarkatirtha Lakṣmaṇashāstri Joshi of Wai, who knows English well, studied all Darśanas and Śāstras under Swami Kevalananda and is a critical scholar.


That those sub-castes that have similar usages, saṁskāras and rules about food should merge and such merger is not against Dharmaśāstra; there is no objection to any Hindu sitting in the same row with other persons of different varṇas provided vegetarians are served vegetarian eatables; that Hindus including untouchables are entitled to study the Veda and have upanayana performed with Vedic mantras and priests conversant with the upanayana procedure should be ready to do so, if invited; if any one takes to another religion owing to force or fraud or of his free will and wants to revert to the Hindu fold he should be allowed to come in after proper expiation and after undergoing a simple _vidhi_ [^2657]; marriages of spouses of the same gotra and pravara should be allowed provided there is no bar on the ground of sapiṇḍa relationship ( vide Hindu Marriage Act, 25 of 1955, sec. 5 items 4 and 5 ); that divorce be allowed among the castes in which it is not allowed at present on the ground of conversion to another religion of one of the spouses &c. ( almost the same grounds as in sec. 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act of 1955 ); a Hindu widow succeeding as heir to her husband takes an absolute estate except when any of the following relatives of the husband are alive, viz. daughter, daughter's son, mother, father, brothers brother's son, paternal grand-parents, paternal first cousin ( vide Hindu Succession Act, 30 of 1956 sec. 14 which goes further by omitting the near relatives specified above ). Most of the _decisions mentioned above were proclaimed from ten to twenty years_ before our Constitution came into operation.

[^2657]: Vide H. of Dh. Vol. IV pp. 828-830 where the 'Hindūkaraṇavidhi', prepared by the Dharmanirṇaya-maṇḍala for re-admission to Hinduism is set out in Sanskrit. This re-admission _vidhi_ (in Sanskrit) has been translated into Marathi and Hindi.

## Procedures for cultural equality among Hindus

Among the standing complaints against brāhmaṇas, one has been that they debarred millions of people called 'Śūdras' from Vedic studies. Therefore, the Maṇḍala announced that all Hindus ( including the so called untouchables ) should observe the worship of the sun, repetition of the Gāyatri-mantra ( Ṛg. III. 62.10, Tai. S. 1. 5. 6.4, Vāj. S. III. 35 ) and reading or recital of the Bhagavadgitā (whole or part) every day, since these common observances would help in creating the sentiment of cultural equality among all Hindus. The procedure of morning and evening ( sandhya ) worship is brief and is quoted below[^2658].

In order to cultivate a sense of unity among all Hindus (including the so-called untouchables), the Maṇḍala prepared a congregational prayer ( to be recited by all Hindus in a congregation once in a month ) consisting of the following eleven passages culled from the Vedic literature, viz. Atharvaveda X. 8.1, Ṛg. X. 82.3, I. 164.16, Vāj. 8. 25.21, Ṛg. X. 121. 10, Tai, Ār. 4.42.5, the Gāyatrimantra, Br̥. Up. I. 3,28 (asato mā sad-gamaya, tamaso mā jyotir-gamaya, mṛtyor māऽmr̥tam gamaya), Ṛg. X. 191.2-4. In many villages some people tried to introduce this congregational prayer, but after some time most people complained that they found it difficult to commit to memory and recite the Vedic passages and requested that similar congregational prayers be prepared in Hindi and therefore the Maṇḍala prepared a brief prayer of five verses in Hindi.

The above lines would only briefly illustrate how we would have to proceed if we want an emotional integration of all our countrymen, particularly on the social and religious plane. But we must not forget what the foundation of our culture and civilization has been throughout the past ages. Ancient sages laid the foundation by insisting upon this that there is and must be harmony between man's spirit and the spirit of the world and man's endeavour should be to realize in his actions and in his life this harmony and unity.[^2659] The Upaniṣads teach that man gains by giving up ( by renunciation) and exhorts man not to covet another's wealth (Īśopaniṣad I 'tena tyaktena bhuñjitha mā gr̥dhaḥ kasya svid dhanam').

[^2658]: प्रातः स्नात्वा पूर्वाभिमुखः, सायं हस्तौ पादौ च प्रक्षाल्य पश्चिमाभिमुखः आसने उपविश्य आचम्य प्राणानायम्य श्रीपरमेश्वरप्रीत्यर्थे प्रातः सन्ध्योपास्ति करिष्ये इति प्रातःसङ्कल्पं कुर्यात् । श्रीपरमेश्वरप्रीत्यर्थे सायंसन्ध्योपास्तिं करिष्ये इति सायम् । ततः अर्घ्यप्रदानम्। ओं भूर्भुवः स्वः। तत्सवितुर्वरेण्यं भर्गो देवस्य धीमहि। धियो यो नः प्रचोदयात् । श्रीसूर्याय इदमर्घ्ये दत्तं न मम इति त्यागः । इति त्रिवारम् । अथ प्रातरुत्थाय सायमासीनः अष्टोत्तरशतं दशवारं वा-ओं भूर्भुवः स्वः तत्सवितुर्वरेण्यं भर्गो देवस्य धीमहि धियो यो नः प्रचोदयात् ॥ इति मन्त्रस्य जपं कुर्यात्। तत उपस्थानम्। पूषन्नेकर्षे यम सूर्य प्राजापत्य व्यूह रश्मीन् समूह तेजः । यत्ते रूपं कल्याणतमं तत्ते पश्यामि। योऽसावसौ पुरुषः सोहमस्मि (ईशावास्योपनिषद् 16) इति । ततः कर्मसमाप्तिं सोदकं ब्रूयात् । अनेन सन्ध्योपासनाख्येन कर्मणा भगवान्परमेश्वरः प्रयिताम् । ओं तत्सत् । इति द्विराचामेत् ।
Two lines referring to Gotra, Pravara, Veda, Śākhā and Sūtra and to making an obeisance to Guru are omitted.

[^2659]: Many thoughtful men in the West have been influenced immensely by the advaita Vedānta and its emphasis on sound moral preparation before one can realize the One Essence underlying the universe; vide 'What Vedānta means to me a Symposium edited by John Yale ( Rider & Co., London, 1961 ), in which the views of 16 writers are set out, That of Aldous Huxley summarizes (pp. 19-20 ) the Upaniṣadic doctrine in the same words as on p. 1631 above. The same summary he gave in his novel 'Time must have a stop' 1945, p. 289.

The Bhagavadgitā emphasized doing one's duty without hankering for the rewards thereof. Science oannot answer such fundamental questions as occur to every thoughtful person viz. what is the ultimate cause, is it brahman, what is our origin, by what are we sustained, what is our destiny (goal), being influenced by what do we persist in patbs leading to pain and misery (Sv. Up. I. I). They are answered by the ancient[^2660] Upanisada, but not by science so far.

The chief aim of Indian culture and civilization was not to attain military and political power over other countries and peoples; it neglected to organize Indians for offensive and defensive purposes, nor encouraged the starting of immense corporations for the acquisition of wealth. But in those days of koon competition between nations and peoples we must not only koop a vigilant eye on the eternal principles of our culture but also on the worldly happiness of our countrymon in the midst of the warring elements in the world. Our people often took and take to premature vairāgya(renunciation),while Western nations and men have been laying for the last few centuries great store by extreme activity. Now that our leaders are thinking of remodelling our society and spiritual life they must cultivate qualities whereby they at least will be sthitaprajña i. e. fully developed or ideal souls (Bhagavadgitā II. 55–68) or men of God (Gita XIII. 13-18). Social reforms and politice have to be preached through our age-old religion and philosophy. [^2661] If a large majority of our people and the leaders throw away or veglect

(Continued from last page)

[^2660]. mai tari P rof we ga: FA FTAT ATA eta \# संप्रतिष्ठाः। अधिष्ठिताः केन मुखेतरेषु वर्तामहे ब्रह्माविदो व्यवस्थाम् । श्वेताच. उप. I. 1.:

7 THT, FA FATA I gr. 34. V, 11, 1.

[^2661]. Our politicians seem at present to be treading the path bomoro asly quoted from an American writer long before Independence by Prima Minister Nehru in his Autobiography' Politics is the gentle art of getting votes from the poor and campaign funds from the rich by promising to protect oach from the other' (p. 131 ). In the same work Panditji says that Gandhiji's reference to Ramarājya as a golden age jarred on his ears and that his closa associates ball humorously said that whes svarājya (Independence) cama these fads must not be encouraged (pp. 72-73 ).Danger of losing both spirituality and betterment

1709

religion and spirituality altogether, the probability is that we shall lose both spiritual life and social bettermont, This is not the place to say more on this point. Vide pp. 1478-79 above for the sound moral preparation required before one realizes the pervasion of everything by brahman and pp. 1623 & for the proposition that the One Principle is variously named by sages, which takon together lead to universal brotherhood, kindliness and tolerance. From time immemorial all religious cults in India (except Buddhism and Jainism) recognized that there was One Principle (or Deity of some kind ) and in the immortality of the soul. The tremendous march of science and mastery over soma of the forces of nature has gone to the heads of many modern mion and made them conceited. Science can disclose to us at the most secondary causes; but it has to be silent as to the ultimate cause and the ultimate destiny of man. It cannot tell us what the purpose of life is, it cannot tell us anything about moral values, The present and the following generations have to be trained in an environment where spiritual life, love of truth, sense of and belief in the brotherhood of man or at least of our owcountry. men, love of peace and sympathy for the oppressed would be held to be supreme virtues to be attempted by all people,

It is most difficult to suggest in a brief space a code of conduct for all the millions of India. But for men of limited education and busy life a few suggestions by way of illustra tions may be set out. The idea of pollution by the touch of men belonging to certain castes must be given up and much more therefore the idea of pollution by the more shadow of certain people,3662 Swami Vivekananda (Works Vol. V. p.152) Was 80 angered as to say "The religion of India is at present dont touchism". Reason and science must be resorted to for check ing or abandoning dogmas based on ancient authority. The myths and legends of the Purāṇas on the origin of the universe, about eclipses and so forth that are not credible in the light of

[^2662]. Vide H. of Dh of Vol. II p. 173–174 on the Smrti rales about shadow (chāyā) showing gradual excess of exclasiveness in later times. मक्षिका विषश्ठाया गौरवारिश्मयः। रजो पूर्वायुरनिश्च स्पर्श मेष्यानि निदिशेत् ॥ मजु V. 133, fary 23,51.

Vide above p. 242 where it is established that long before the first half of the 6th century, Indian astronomers bad arrived at the correct causes of Bolar and lupar eclipses but even up to this day edacated men often act in such a way that it seems that they believe in the demon Rābu being the Cause of eclipses.

1710

History of Dharmatāstra (sec. X, O1.XXXVII

science should not be included in the religious creeds of these days and should be treated as more myths and legende. Many Chzistians even in these days ( and most Hindus and Moslems) believe in a heaven above and a hell or hells below. But Sabara[^2663] (in the first centuries of the Christian era ) holds that heaven is not a place ( vide pp. 1211-1215 above). Therefore, heaven and hell as described in ancient Sanskrit works cannot be made an article of faith for modern men. It is often said that myths may be represented as facts to simple people for the sake of beneficial results (e. g. for inducing them to perform sacrifices or to observe rules of morality &c.). But this is not propor as there are dangers in this. In these days of growing popular education, when the myth becomes exposed, the men who once believed it not only give up that myth but also might give up everything contained in ancient works as unbelievable Space does not permit any elaborate cataloguing of what should be given up and what striven for in these days. Values, aims and institutions that were accepted by almost all people only a few decades ago are now challenged and new patterns are in process of being moulded. The chief catalytic agencies are modern science and Western thought and literature. The old struoture of beliefs is tottering and laxity in morals has made great headway. But whatever happens, we must so regulate society that the family as a social unit[^2664] is preserved and safeguarded, every child of whatever class or race must have equal opportuni ties of education, man's daily work must be held to be divine work and worship, great inequalities of wealth and possessions must be eliminated.

Swami Vivekananda uttered the following exhortation long ago “ The ignorant Indian, the poor and destitute Indian, the Brahman Indian, the Pariah Indian is my brother," "Repeat and pray day and night'O Lord of Gauri ! make me a man'" quoted in " Sources of Indian Tradition " by W. T. de Bary and others (New York, 1958) p. 659, Vide Atharvaveda XII. 1.45 for universal brotherhood of all men whose mother is the Earth.

2063. Vide above pp. 1224-25 for criticism of Sabara's view that Veda invented stories that never happened,

[^2664]. In This I believe '(pbilosopbios of 100 thoughtful men and womeo io all walks of life) edited by E. P. Morgan (London, 1953 ). Sir Charles Darwin (author of "New conception of matter and the sext million years and grandson of the author of the Origio of species') empbasizes the importaace of family as the continuing unit of human life' (p. 30).

.

nd Gutanjali

.

Kathopaniṣad and Gitanjali

1778

This volume (the last in the History of Dharmaśāstra ) may 2 be brought to a close with a quotation from the Kathopaniṣad[^2665] and another from Rabindranath Tagore's Gitāñjali :

'Get up, awake and having secured highly gifted (teachers ) understand ( the Truth ); the sharp edge of a razor is difficult to pags over; thus the wise say that the path (to Realization ) of Self) is hard' (Kathopaniṣad );

Where the mind is without fear and the head is held high; Where knowledge is free; Where the world has not been broken up into fragments by

narrow domestic walls; Where words come out from the depths of truth; Where tireless striving stretches its arms toward perfection; Where the clear stream of reason' has not lost its way into

the dreary desort sand of dead habit; Where the mind is led forward by thee into ever-widening

thought and action Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, let my country

awake.

9

[^2665]. rasa saa 97c7 Teen Trai gia Urt Parṣtar gran gi qura

gafall met. III. 14.
