+++
title = "0"

+++
To my parents  
JOHN and ELIZABETH LESLIE for their love and patience over the years  
and for their acceptance of my prolonged infatuation with India 

## Contents 
List of PLATES Xi  
List of FigurES Xİİ  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Xiii  

1. INTRODUCTION  
Mode of Presentation and Overview of the Contents of the Stridharmapaddhati 4  
The Author of the Stridharmapaddhati 10  
The Political Background: the Maratha Rajas of Thanjavur 13  
The Intellectual Milieu 16  
The Women of the Period 19  
The Literary Genre: the Stridharmapaddhati in the 
Context of the Religious Law (dharmaśāstra) 23  

2. THE STRĪDHARMAPADDHATI OF TRYAMBAKAYAJVAN 27  

I TRYAMBAKA'S INTRODUCTION (Sdhp. 1v.1-2v.5)  

II THE DAILY DUTIES OF WOMEN (strīņām ahnikam; 
Sdhp. 2v. 5-21r.3)  

IIA BEFORE DAWN (Sdhp. 2v.5-7v.9)  
On Waking Up (prabodhanam) 51  
Before dawn 51  
Before one's husband 52  
Meditation (devatädhyānam) 52  
What may or may not be seen (darśaniyānyadarśanīyāni 
ca) 54  
Household Tasks (1) 58  
Preparing the grain (dhānyasamskārādi) 58  
Cleaning the house (gṛhasammärjanādikam) 59  
Smearing with cow-dung (gomayenånulepanam); 
the goddess Śri 59  
Worship of the threshold (dehalīpūjā) 63 Delegating housework 64  
The care and worship of cows (gosevanam) 65  
Ablutions, etc. 69  
Urinating and defecating (mütrapuriṣotsargah) 69  
Cleansing rituals (saucam) 71  
The sipping ritual (ācamanam) 75  
Cleaning the teeth (dantadhāvanam) 78  
The ritual bath (snänam) 82  
Getting dressed (vastradharaṇam) 88  
Wearing the tilaka mark (tilakadhāraṇam) 96  

IIB AT DAWN (Sdhp. 7v.9-10v.1)  
Serving the Sacred Fire (agniśuśrūṣā) 102  
The role of the wife 107  
Where the patni may walk 115  
Which wife is the patni? 121  
At which point should the wife participate? 129  
How important is the presence of either husband or 
wife? 132  
Is the patni the ritual agent of the sacrifice? 141  
The Offering of Respect to the Sun (arghyadānam) 149  

IIC DAY (Sdhp. 10v.1-19v.4)  
Saluting One's Elders (gurüṇām abhivādanam) 156   
Paying homage (pådavandanam) to one's parents-in-law 161   
Personal services 163  
Household Tasks (2) (gṛhakṛtyam) 168  
General attitude 168  
Managing the household accounts 168  
Whether the wife may talk to other men (parapuruşa) 170  
Midday Rituals 176  
General comments 176  
Image worship (devapūjā) 178  
The worship of all gods (vaiśvadeva) 180  
Paying homage to guests (atithipūjā) 183  
General rules 183  
The necessity for the ritual; Naciketas and Yama 185  
The penalties in store if the ritual is neglected 188  
The rewards in store if the ritual is performed 193  
Comparison with the fire ritual 196  
The role of the wife 198  
The distinction between ‘guests" and casual visitors 205  
At Meals (bhojanam) 210  
The wife's duty to serve at meals (pariveṣaṇam) 210   
A man should not eat in his wife's presence 214  
How the wife should serve the meal 217  
The wife's own meal 221  
Her ritual offering (balidānam) to the goddess Jyesṣṭhā 227  
Post-prandial duties (bhojanānantarakṛtyam) 229  

IID EVENING (Sdhp. 19v. 4-21r.3)  
Evening Rituals and Duties 234 Going to Bed (sayanam) 234  

III THE INHERENT NATURE OF WOMEN  
(strisvabhāvaḥ; Sdhp. 21r. 3-22r. 8)  
246 

IV DUTIES COMMON TO ALL WOMEN  
(strīṇām sādhāraṇā dharmāḥ; Sdhp. 22r.8-48v.6) 273 
General rulings on behaviour 273  
Things to be avoided (varjanīyāḥ) 274  
Women's property (strīdhanam) 276  
In praise of the pativrata 280  
General quotations 280  
Draupadi and Satyabhāmā 280  
Kṛṣṇa and Subhadra 281  
Uma and Maheśvara 281  
Śāṇḍili and Sumanā 282  
The Religious Duties of the Menstruating Woman 
(rajasvalādharmāḥ) 283  
The polluting power of menstrual blood 283  
Prohibitions relating to the menstruating woman and defects accruing to the child 284  
Special rulings 285  
The ritual bath of purification 286  
The proper time to make love (ṛtukāladharma) 287  
The Religious Duties of the Pregnant Woman(garbhiṇīdharmāḥ) 288  
Rulings and prohibitions 288  
The pregnant woman's cravings (dohada) 289  
Entry into the lying-in chamber 290  
The Religious Duties of the Woman Whose Husband is Away 
(proșitabhartṛkādharmāḥ) 291  
The injunction relating to dying with one's husband 
(sahagamanavidhiḥ) 291  
Quotations in favour of the practice 292  
The objection that it is a form of suicide 292  
The rewards it brings the good wife 293  
Sahagamana as a prayaścitta for the bad wife 295  
Sahagamana in relation to brahmin women 297  
The Religious Duties of the Widow (vidhavādharmāḥ) 298  
When sahagamana does not apply 298  
The conduct of the widow 299  
The question of niyoga 300  
The impurity and inauspiciousness of widows 302  
Whether or not the widow should shave her head 303  
The three kinds of pativrată 304  

V TRYAMBAKA'S CONCLUSION: OBEDIENT SERVICE TO ONE'S HUSBAND IS THE Primary ReligiOUS DUTY OF A WIFE (patriśuśrüṣaṇam mukhyo dharmaḥ; Sdhp. 48v.6-88r.1)  
She Should Serve Him Without Regard for Her Own Life (präṇānām avigananaya) 305  
Sitä and the demon 305  
The brahmin's wife and the crane-demon 306  
The pigeons and the bird-catcher 306  
Accepting Even Her Husband's Sale of Her(bhartṛkṛtātmavikrayāngî (kāra]): Hariścandra 307  
Even if it Conflicts with Other Duties(itaraḍharmopamardena) 308  
The ascetic Kausika and the brahmin woman 308  
Further quotations 309  
If her husband requires it, she should even do what is wrong 309  
Pandu and Kunti 310  
Sudarsana and Oghavati 310  
'Service' versus 'Obedience'; Svähä and Arundhati 312  
Sāvitrī 313  
Tryambaka's Summary 314  
Concluding Verses and Colophon 316 

3. CONCLUSION 318 

APPENDIX 331 
The text: Collation of manuscripts and Stemma codicum   
ABBREVIATIONS 339  
BibliographY 343  

1. Texts and translations  
2. Secondary literature  

INDEX 

## Plates 
### Endpapers 
a Bhāgavatapurāṇa, rāsakrīḍa section (chapters 29-33 of the tenth 
canto): palm-leaf manuscript; Sanskrit text in Oriya script. 
Orissa, early eighteenth century. 
British Library: OR.11689, fol. 2r. 
b As above. 
British Library: OR.11689, fol. 3v. 
c As above. 
British Library: OR.11689. fol. 2v. 
d Rādhākṛṣṇakeli: palm-leaf manuscript; Oriya poem of Kṛṣṇa's life 
in Brindaban, possibly by Balaji Pattanayak (Losty 1980: 14). Orissa, early seventeenth century. 
British Library: OR.11612, fol. 19r. 

### Between pages 48 and 49 
1 Woman milking white cow with calf watching 
OR.11689, fol. Iv (detail) 
2 Woman anointing herself with sandalwood paste or perfume from a pot 
OR.11689, fol. 3r (detail) 
3 Woman holding mirror and applying collyrium to her eyes 
OR.11689, fol. 3r (detail) 
4 Woman arranging ornaments in another's hair 
OR.11612, fol. 13r (half folio) 
5 Woman putting tilaka mark on her forehead while another holds a 
mirror 
OR.11612, fol. 13r (half folio) 
6 Woman squatting to cook, and fanning herself with her left hand 
OR.11689, fol. Iv (detail) 
7 Woman standing to serve her husband while he sits and eats 
OR.11689, fol. 2r (detail) 
8 Woman massaging her husband's feet as he relaxes on a bed after his 
meal 
OR.11689, fol. 3v (detail) 
9 Woman dining alone, eating what is left of her husband's meal, after 
tending to his needs 
OR.11689, fol. 3v (detail) 
10 Woman sitting on the ground, playing with male child 
OR.11689, fol. 2v (detail) 
11 Woman sitting with child on her lap, suckling him 
OR.11689, fol. 2v (detail) 
 
xii 
Plates 
12 Couple making love on a low bed, naked except for their ornaments, 
the woman on top 
OR.11612, fol. 19r (half folio) 
13 Couple making love on a low bed, both wearing ornaments, woman 
drinking from a bottle 
OR.11612, fol. 19r (half folio) 
Figures 
1 The mode of presentation 10 
2 Origins of the Maratha Rajas of Thanjavur 13 
3 The Maratha Rajas of Thanjavur 15 
4 The family of ministers 18 
5 Dhundhiraja, court poet 19 
6 Parallel timetable for women and men 47 
7 Layout of the ritual enclosure 117 
 
Acknowledgements 
Far more people have been instrumental in the completion of this book than I could mention in a brief list of acknowledgements. My thanks go first to David Pingree of Brown University, who drew my attention many years ago to Tryambakayajvan's Stridharma- paddhati. In Madras, S. S. Janaki of the Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute helped me locate manuscripts of the work, and a copy of the elusive printed text with its Tamil translation. In Thanjavur, the pandits of the Tanjore Maharaja Sarasvati Mahal Library provided me with a working space for the length of my stay. In Pune, Pandit Vamana Balakrsna Bhagavata was always ready to read with me, despite the pressures of his own work in vyākaraṇa. 
But above all, I wish to thank Tarkatirtha Lakshmanshastri Joshi of Vai. President of the Prājñapāṭhaśalāmaṇḍala since 1916 and general editor of the massive Dharmakośa project, Pandit Joshi was over eighty when we met. Yet he gave me the unforgettable experience of studying with him as an antevāsinī: for two months, I lived in his home, ate with his family, and read and discussed my text with him for up to six hours a day. The energy with which he embraced my project and tackled my problems has left me eternally in his debt. It has been a privilege and a pleasure to study with this remarkable man. 
Richard Gombrich deserves my special thanks for his conscien- tious supervision of the first draft of the book. Amongst those who were kind enough to read all or parts of that draft, and to discuss its contents with me, I should like to thank Dominik Wujastyk, Friedrich Wilhelm, Werner Menski, Sanjukta Gupta, Nicholas Allen and Gudrun Bühnemann. 
Finally, I should like to thank my family for their generous encouragement. As I completed the final draft, I went into labour for the birth of our first child, Ania Elizabeth Leslie Wujastyk. As I finished checking the first proofs, I went into labour for the birth of our second child, Marina Phyllida Leslie Wujastyk. In the various stages of pregnancy, delivery and recovery-for both babies and for the book-I was supported by my husband, Dominik Wujastyk. He read most of what I wrote, checked references for me when I was unable to reach the library, double-checked the proofs, and helped with the index. His 
 
xiv 
Acknowledgements 
confidence in my work extended even to bribing me to continue when I was ready to give up. I owe him heartfelt thanks. 
I. Julia Leslie 
Visiting Lecturer and Research Associate in the Women's Studies in Religion Program The Centre for the Study of World Religion Harvard Divinity School May 1988 

## The Text; Collation of Manuscripts and Stemma Codicum
APPENDIX
The Text; Collation of Manuscripts and Stemma Codicum

The following MSS were available for comparison:
T1 The Tanjore Maharaja Serfoji's Sarasvati Mahal Library, Thanjavur
TD Vol. XVIII (1934), p.8708-9, cat. no. 18966; Burnell (1880) p.139a, no. 315; Oppert Vol. II (1885), p.471, no.8107; CC Vol.I (1891), p.241; NCC Vol. VIII (1974), p. 284.
Paper MS; devanāgarī script; 94 folios numbered 1-88; 9 inches by 5 inches; 10 lines to a page; 28–32 akṣaras to a line; complete.
This MS is in good condition although folios 2 and 88 are torn at the edges. It is clearly written with bold strokes forming square upright characters. Two hand-drawn lines on each side of each page form margins; except in folios 1 and 2 where each margin consists of two pairs of lines, and in the inserted folios 26(1) and 26(2) which have no margins. The word strī is written in devanagari in the top left-hand margin of the verso of most folios; the word dharma in the top right-hand margin of the verso of some of the earlier folios; and the pious ejaculation rāma in the bottom right-hand margin of some folios (e.g. 2v,3r,4r). There are frequent corrections: the smaller ones, in the margin, of a syllable, word or phrase, are usually in the first hand (e.g. 2r,3r,4r,30r); the longer ones written at the top or bottom of a folio and marked at the beginning and end with a number, are often in a more spidery second hand (e.g. 6v,15v,17r,25v); while some other longer ones are probably in a third hand (e.g. 39r,39v,48v,67r).
In addition, there are three lengthy insertions into the original text. Between folios 26 and 27, three extra folios are to be found: 26(1), 26(2), and 26(3); all three to be inserted at 26v.9. Folio 26(1)r is totally illegible, but has evidently been rewritten in the same hand on one side of a displaced and unnumbered folio. This replacement folio and 26(1)v are written in the spidery second hand: 26(1)r (replacement) has 13 lines to the page, 32-8 akṣaras to a line; 26(1)v has 94 lines to the page, 30-40 akṣaras to a line. Folios 26(2) and 26(3) seem to be in the first hand but are neater and more evenly spaced: 9, 9, 8 and 6 lines to a page; 26-34 aksaras to a line. The other two major insertions involve one folio each. Between folios 46 and 47, there is an extra folio 47(1) written in the second hand: 14 and 11 lines to the page; 25-38 akṣaras to a line; to be inserted at folio 46v.3, before the bracketed deletion. Finally, between folios 66 and 67 (the latter has the number 68 added in the second
332
Stridharmapaddhati
hand), there is an extra folio 67(1) written in the same second hand:10 (+ 1} insertion) and 94 lines to the page; 28-32 aksaras to a line; to be inserted at 66v.10, before the bracketed deletion. These extra folios account for the inconsistency of 94 folios numbering 1-88 as described. (For an additional folio insert outside the passages chosen for comparison, see section V, note 3).
Incipit, folio Iv.1-2: //śrīganadhipataye namaḥ || ||śrīsarasvatyai namaḥ// //śrīgurubhyo namaḥ|| ||mukhyo dharmasmṛtiṣu vihito bhartṛśiśruṣanam hi...
Explicit, folio 88r. 7–8: guruyajñesakṛpayā śrīmatryambakayajvanā|| prītaye nṛsimhasya kṛtā strīdharmapaddhatiḥ||3|| cha|| cha|| śrīkṛṣṇārpanam1 astu// cha (Next line, in another hand:) dh 100
T2- The Tanjore Maharaja Serfoji's Sarasvati Mahal Library, Thanjavur
TD Vol.XVIII, pp.8708-9, cat.no.18967; Burnell p.139a, no.316; NCC unpublished files.
Paper MS; devanāgarī script; 65 folios numbered consecutively; 15 inches by 7 inches; 12-13 lines to a page; 38-42 akṣaras to a line; complete.
This MS is in good condition and in one hand throughout. The script is small, even and compact; and there are few corrections, either in the margin (e.g. 19v) or otherwise (e.g. the bracketed deletions on folio 20r.8-10). The top left-hand corner of the verso of each folio contains either the word strīdharma (e.g. 5v,6v,8v), or the word stri (with or without dharma in the right-hand corner; e.g. 2v,3v,4v,7v), or nothing (e.g. 13v,26v,27v); the verso of folio lv has strīdha in the top left-hand corner, rma in the top right- hand one. There are no margins.
Incipit, folio 1v.1-2: śrīgaṇādhipataye namaḥ śrīsarasvatyai namaḥ śrīguru bhyo namaḥ mukhyo dharmasmṛtiṣu vihito bhartṛśiśruṣaṇam hi... Explicit, folio 65v.7-8: guruyajñeśakṛpayā śrīmatryambakayajvanā prītaye śrīnṛsimhasya kṛtā strīdharmapaddhatiḥ//3|| ||chall chall śrīkṛṣṇ(?)ārpa- nam2 astu // (Another hand:) dh.170
T3-The Tanjore Maharaja Serfoji's Sarasvati Mahal Library, Thanjavur
TD Vol.XVIII, p.8708-9, cat.no.18968, MS no.16374; NCC files.
1. 'krsna ̊, i.e. sn for ; cf. kṛṣṇasya, T, 88.2; prabhaviṣṇaḥ, T, 26(2)r.4. 2. Unclear, but probably as in T1 (see notel); cf. kṛṣṇasya, T2 22г.6; prabhaviṣṇavaḥ, T2 20r.12.

Collation of Manuscripts
333
Paper MS; devanāgarī script; 60 folios numbered consecutively; 15 inches by 7 inches; 12 lines to a page; 40-6 akṣaras to a line; complete.
This MS is in good condition and in one hand throughout, possibly the same as in T2. The script is small, even and compact, with few corrections (e.g. 2v,18r, 18v). The word stridharma is written in devanagari in the top left-hand corner of the verso of each folio; the word strī in the top left-hand corner of 60r; and the ejaculation rāma in the bottom right-hand margin of (usually the verso of) some folios (e.g. 4v,8v,9v). There are no margins.
Incipit, folio lv.1: śrīgaṇādhipataye namaḥ|| ||śrīsarasvatyai namaḥ|| ||śrī- gurubhyo namaḥ// mukhyo dharmasmṛtisu vihito bhartṛśiśruṣanam hi... Explicit, folio 60r.11 – 12: guruyajñeśakṛpayā śrīmatryambakayajvanā|| prītaye śrīnṛsimhasya kṛtā strīdharmapaddhatiḥ||3|| dh 170 (unclear) śrīkṛṣṇ(?)ār- panam3 astu// cha// (Another hand, unclear:) dh 1490//
M— The Mysore Government Oriental Library, Mysore
MSC Vol.III (1955), p.704, serial no.9474, MS no.A 163; listed in the NCC files incorrectly as Strīdharmasangraha.
Paper MS; devanāgarī script; 38 folios numbered consecutively; 33 inches by 19 inches; 33 lines to a page; 22-4 akṣaras to a line; complete.
This MS is in excellent condition and in one hand throughout. The script is extremely neat and small, with very few corrections (e.g. 1r.3, 1v.24). It is pre- sented on vertical pages in book format, suggesting a more recent origin than those in Thanjavur, but the pages are numbered as folios (i.e. lr,lv,2r, 2v etc.). Each recto has a devanāgarī numeral written in the top centre, and the equivalent roman numeral stamped in the top right-hand corner. On some folios, strīdharma is written beneath the devanagari numeral in the top centre (e.g. 13r,17r etc.). There are no margins.
Incipit, folio 1r.1: (Top centre, in place of the devanagari numeral:) //śrī// strīdharma// (line 1:) śrīgaṇeśaya namaḥ|| mukhyo dharmasmṛtișu vihito bhartṛśiśruṣaṇam hi...
Explicit, folio 38v.14-16: guruyajñeśakṛpayā śrīmatryambakayajvanā || pritaye śrīnṛsimhasya kṛtā strīdharmapaddhatiḥ //3// śrīkṛṣṇārpaṇam* astu// śrīrāmacamdrāya namaḥ|| cha|| cha|| cha|| cha|| cha
TO-In my possession
This is a hand-written copy of T, made in 1981 at my request and used in the 3. Unclear, but probably as in T, (see note 1); cf. kṛṣṇasya, T3 20г.5; cf. the anomalous for sn in prabhaviṣṇavaḥ, T, 18v.3 (cf. M 18v.3, note 4).
4. for sn; cf. kṛṣṇasya, M 12v.31; prabhavisnavah, M 18v.3.
   3

334
Stridharmapaddhati
initial stages of my research. It was copied by Srimati P.S. Lalitha, Sanskrit copyist, and checked by Srimati S. Rājalakṣmī Sanskrit paṇḍitā, both of the Tanjore Maharaja Serfoji's Sarasvati Mahal Library, Thanjavur. (For a description of this copy, together with incipit and explicit, see Leslie 1983(2): appendix A.)
I was unable to locate the MS entitled Stridharmasangraha that is listed in the NCC files as part of a collection to be found in the Fort, Vizianagaram Estate, Andhra Pradesh. It is described as a paper MS, damaged, and in Telugu script. The NCC entry is based on a typed list available to the compi- lers.
A printed text (PT) entitled Tryambakarāyamakhinibaddhā strīnām āvaśyikā dharmapaddhatiḥ, complete with Tamil translation, was also available. 275 pages; 8 inches by 44 inches; 12-14 lines of Sanskrit and, below these, 12-18 lines of Tamil translation; modern typesetting with indentations for verse, quotation and paragraphs; opening invocation omitted, otherwise complete.
I found two copies: one in the Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute, Madras (accession no. 5881; undated but received between 1949 and 1956; part of the collection donated by M. Subramaniam Iyer of ‘Amrtavilas'; front and back covers missing); the other in the Vedadharmaparipālanasabhā, Kumbakonam (no accession number or date; complete). Neither copy bore any information regarding editor, translator, publisher, printer, place or date. However, His Holiness Candrasekharendrasarasvati informed me in December 1981 that it was edited and translated into Tamil in approximately 1917-20 by Pañcapageśasastri of the Kañci Kamakoți Math, the younger brother of Ganapatiśāstrī, the well-known editor of the Trivandrum Sanskrit Series. Unfortunately, Pañcapageśaśāstrī's son, N. Ramani Sastri, has been unable to substantiate this. At all events, the edition is a useful one, well printed, and with comparatively few errors. It has formed the basis of my collation of the above MSS.
Before embarking on an analysis of the text, it was necessary to establish a stemma codicum setting out the relationship between the four extant MSS available to me: T1, T2, T, and M. Selecting the same three passages from each MS, I compared each in turn with PT; that is, the opening section (PT 1–10), the closing section (PT 271-5), and a central portion chosen because in T1 (25v-27v) it involves two hands, a lengthy insertion into the text, and an unnumbered misplaced folio (PT 73.3-84.10). The precise details of the col- lation process, including examples of the errors and variants noted are to be found in appendix A of my doctoral thesis (see Leslie 1983(2):352–67). A much abbreviated version is presented here.

2
Collation of Manuscripts
2
335
A comparison of the collations of PT with T, and T2 respectively reveal that T2 is an apograph of T1. Apart from a large number of shared errors and variants, several errors are both unique to T, and explicable only by reference to T1. Conclusive proof is provided by T2 20r.8, where the scribe-after copying an entire inserted folio-reverts to the place of the original insert (T, 26v.9) and copies the remaining two lines. Realizing his mistake, he then cancels those lines by bracketing them, copies the other two folios yet to be inserted, and then returns to those two lines once more.
A similar examination of the errors and variants of T, and T, reveal that the latter is also an apograph of the former. Again, apart from numerous shared errors and variants, several are both unique to T, and explicable only in terms of T1. In addition, few errors or variants shared by T2 and T2 are not also shared by one of the other MSS. Contamination is therefore slight.
2
The relationship between T, and M is only marginally less obvious. Once again, there are numerous shared errors and variants, some of which are also shared by T2 or T3 or both. However, some are exclusive to M and can be seen to originate in T1. M is thus also an apograph of T1. In addition, several errors and variants are shared by T2 and M but not by any of the other MSS. Some- what fewer errors and variants are shared by T, and M but not by the other MSS. The stemma is therefore as follows:
3
い
T2
T.
3
M
TO and PT remain.
An examination of TO confirms that T, was the only extant manuscript consulted.
2
PT is evidently the work of an editor rather than the usual copyist for the majority of obvious errors present in T, have been corrected. Of the variants and remaining errors, none are shared with M alone, none with T, alone, none with T2 alone, some with T, in common with other MSS, and a few with T1 alone. There are, however, a large number of variants not shared by any of the extant MSS. Since these seem to be largely intentional rather than due to scribal error, there is no need to posit a lost exemplar between T, and PT. I have therefore assumed a simple stemma as follows:
1

336
Strīdharmapaddhati
I'
T2
T3
M
PT
TO
Since this is a closed recension consisting entirely of apographa, I have dispensed with T2, T3, M and TO except in cases where T1 is illegible or unintelligible. I have therefore used T, as my basic text, while noting the variant readings of PT.
Orthographic peculiarities (e.g. md, mt etc. for nd, nt etc.; ch for cch, vanhir for vahnir) and unimportant slips (e.g. śiśrūṣaṇam, gomasya, viśepi) have been silently corrected. Conventional sandhi (e.g. kīrtir, kartavya etc. for kirttir, karttavya etc.; ah + s for as; as+c for aḥ + c; ih + sa for is + sa; ñ + c for m + c), and punctuation (e.g. yatnato 'piha for yatnatopiha) have been restored. Angle brackets excise; square brackets supplete.
There remains only the question of whether T, is itself a copy or the author's autograph. Since too many of the errors noted in T, can only be explained as the results of misreading by a copyist (see Leslie 1983 (2): appendix A), we must posit at least one, if not more, previous exemplars.
To clarify this supposition, a close examination was made of the three major insertions in T1. They are as follows:
1
A: T1 26v.9 (three folios) >PT 77.7-84.5;
B: T, 46v.3 / 48r. 1 (one folio) > PT 143.4–147.4;
C: T, 66v.10/67 (1)r.9 (one folio) >PT 208.6-210.3.
The second and third folios of A are probably in the first hand (see above). The writing styles of B, C, and the first folio of A, although not identical, are sufficiently similar to suggest the same second hand, but perhaps on different occasions or with a different instrument.
We already know that T, is a copy. Were the insertions also copied from an exemplar? Were they perhaps the result of a second (e.g. comparer's) reading, specifically intended to correct mistakes and reinstate lost passages? Or were they original interpolations added to T1?
Collation of Manuscripts
337
There are several reasons to assume that the insertions too were copied, not composed. First, given the scribal traditions of India, it is highly unlikely that any scribe would presume to make such radical alterations to a religious, and therefore sacred, text. Secondly, insert A is begun by the second scribe and completed by the first; hardly likely if original work were involved. Thirdly, several errors in these interpolated passages are clearly the result of misreading rather than slips of writing.
Assuming then that both T, and the insertions were copied, were they copied from the same exemplar? If they were, then the disruption of the numbering sequence suggests that these passages were somehow lost in the initial transcription and reinstated later. But an examination of the insertions themselves shows that this is unlikely. First, the passages are improbably long. Secondly, none of the 'omissions' are the result of saut du même au même as is the case in many smaller insertions (e.g. T, 25v.8).
I suggest therefore that we are dealing with one of two things. Either this transcription is the result of copying from an exemplar that kept its inter- polated folios at the end where they would not have been seen until later. Or, as seems more likely, it is the result of copying from (a copy of?) the author's first draft and, on discovering (a copy of?) a second draft, of making the appropriate alterations later. If the latter is the case, then the alterations constitute original emendations to the text, not merely the scribe's usual cor- rection of mistakes. Equally, if this is the case, then T1 should make sense without the emendations. A brief examination of the interpolated passages demonstrates that this is in fact so.
In the case of A, three entire folios are inserted into the middle of one line. Without the insert, the argument on stridhana makes sense. The insertion merely develops the argument further, in some instances using material already quoted to make another point. None of the first version is deleted.
In the case of B, the insertion of one folio coincides with an extensive deletion in the first version. If we ignore the former and restore the latter, the argument still makes sense. In fact, much of the deleted passage is reinserted (i.e. T, 46v.5-10 >PT 146.6-147.4); of the rest, some phrases are dropped altogether, while some are reproduced but in a different order and consider- ably enlarged (i.e. T, 46v.3-47(1)v.7>PT 143.3-146.6). This new portion is a complete rewriting of the old. It covers the same ground (prohibitions re- lating to the widow, specifically sexual intercourse with another man accord- ing to the practice of niyoga), but includes two new purvapakṣa objections and refutations (T1 47r.1ff, 47v.5ff.; PT 143.3ff., 146.5ff.).
In the case of C, the insertion again coincides with an extensive deletion in the first version. If we ignore the former and restore the latter, the argu- ment concerning a wife's obedience to her husband (specifically when she is required to do something that in normal circumstances she would not be allowed to do) continues to make sense. The deletion (i.e. T1 66v-67/68)

338
Stridharmapaddhati
begins with a small example of saut du même au même : from ata eva sarvam api (PT 208.6) to ata eva sudarsanopäkhyāne (PT 209.3). Of the rest, some is dropped altogether, and some is reinserted but in a different form. An added complication is that a large portion of insert C is itself deleted (i.e. T, 67v.2– 10) and very little of this is to be found in either the first (i.e. pre-insert) version or in the refurbished insert C.
(The same is true of the additional insert described in section V, p.307, note 3. Without it, the treatise moves coherently from the story of the pigeons and the bird-catcher to that of Kausika and the brahmin woman. The insertion – now in fact missing from T1-provides the entire story of Hariścandra.) I conclude that the stemma codicum is in fact something more like this:
[a1]
[a2]
\T
T2
T3
M

## Abbreviations
adhi.
Ād.P.
Ādit.P.
Ag.P.
Ait.Ãr.
Ait.Br.
Amar.
Ān.
Ang.
Ang.Nik.
adhikaraṇa
Adipurāna
Adityapurāna
Agnipurāna
Aitareyāranyaka
Aitareyabrāhmaṇa
Amarakosa
Anandāśrama edition
Angirah(smṛti)
Anguttaranikāya
Āpastamba (dharmasūtra)
Apararka's commentary on Yajnavalkyasmṛti Apastambagṛhyasutra
Apastambasmṛti Apastambasrautasutra
Ap.
Apar.
Āp.gr.
Āp.Sm.
Ap.śr. Arthas.
Āśv.
Asvalayana
Áśv.gr.
Asvalayanagṛhyasutra
Âśv.śr.
Atri
A.V.
Bal.
Arthasangraha
Asvalayanasrautasūtra
Atri(smrti)
Atharvavedasamhitā
Bālambhaṭṭī, commentary on Yajnavalkyasmṛti Baudhayana (dharmasutra)
Baudhāyanagṛhyasutra
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute
Brahmapurāṇa
Baudh.
Baudh.gr.
Baudh.śr.
Baudhayanasrautasutra
Bhag.P.
Bhāgavatapuraṇa
Bibl.Ind.
Bibliotheca Indica edition
BORI
Br.P.
Br.Sam.
Br.Up.
Car.
CC
ChSS
Dakṣa
Dev.
Dharmāk.
Bṛhatsamhitā
Bṛhadaranyakopanisad
Carakasamhita
Catalogus Catalogorum (see Aufrecht) Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series edition
Dakşa(smrti)
Devaṇṇabhaṭṭa, author of Smṛticandrikā
Dharmākūta
Dh.kosa
Dharmakosa

340
Gaut. Gitä
Gobh.
Gobh.gr.
Gobh.Sm.
GOR
Gov. on Baudh.
Gov. on Manu
Har.
Hariv.
Hir.gr. Hir.śr.
HOS
Ïś.Up.
JAOS
Jai.
Stridharmapaddhati
Gautama (dharmasūtra) Bhagavadgitā
Gobhila
Gobhilagṛhyasutra
Gobhilasmṛti
Gaekwad Oriental Series
Govindasvamin's commentary on Baudhayana-
dharmasutra
Govindaraja's commentary on Manusmrti
Commentary by Haradatta
Harivamsa
Hiranyak esigṛhyasūtra
Hiranyakeśisrautasūtra Harvard Oriental Series
Isopanisad
Journal of the American Oriental Society Jaiminiyasūtra
Dharmasastrasangraha edited by Jīvānanda
Kādambarī
Katyāyanasmṛti
Jiv.
Kad.
Kām.
Kamasutra
Kāś.
Käsikävṛtti
Käth.Sam.
Kāṭhakasamhitā
Kath.Up.
Kathopanisad
Katy.
Katyāyana
Katy.Sm.
Katy.śr.
Katyāyanasrautasūtra
Kaus.Br.
Kaut.
Kull.
Kum.Sl.
Kum.Ta.
Kum.Ṭu. Kūrm.P.
KSS
LaghuSat.
Ling.P. LSJ
M
Mait.
Kauṣītak ibrāhmaṇa
Kautilya's Arthasästra
Kulluka's commentary on Manusmṛti
Kumārilabhatta's Ślokavārtika
Kumārilabhaṭṭa's Tantravārtika
Kumārilabhaṭṭa's Tuptīkā
Kurmapurāṇa
Kashi Sanskrit Series edition
Laghusātātapa(smrti)
Lingapurana
Personal communication from Tarkatirtha
Lakshmanshastri Joshi
MS of Strīdharmapaddhati from Mysore (see
appendix) Maitrāyaṇisamhitā

Abbreviations
341
Mån.gr.
Man.śr.
Manu
Märk.
Mark.P.
Mask. Matsy.P.
Mbh. Medh.
Mit.
MSC
MS(S)
MW
Nand. on Manu
Nand. on Vis.Sm.
Når.
Nirn.
NCC
N.S.
Pad.P.
Pan.
Par.
Par.gr.
Par.M.
Par.Sm.
Pat.
PT
PTS
PVK
Rägh.
Răm.
Råmac.
R.V.
Sab.
Manavagṛhyasūtra
Manavasrautasūtra
Manu(smṛti)
Märkandeya
Märkandeyapurāṇa
Maskarin's commentary on Gautamadharmasūtra
Matsyapuraṇa
Mahābhārata
Medhätithi's commentary on Manusmṛti Mitäkṣar a
Mysore Supplemental Catalogue manuscript(s)
Monier-William's Sanskrit-English Dictionary
Nandana's commentary on Manusmṛti
Nandapandita's commentary on Visnusmrti Nārāyaṇa's commentary on Āśvalāyanagṛhyasūtra Nirnayasindhu
New Catalogus Catalogorum (see Raghavan and
Kunjunni Raja) Nirṇayasagara edition
Padmapurāṇa
Panini's Astadhyāyi Parāśara
Pāraskaragṛhyasūtra
Parāśaramādhavīya Parāśarasmṛti
Patanjali's Mahābhāṣya
Printed text of Stridharmapaddhati (see appendix) Pali Text Society edition
P. V. Kane's History of Dharmasastra
Raghavananda's commentary on Manusmrti Ramayana
Rāmacandra's commentary on Manusmṛti Rgvedasamhitā
Śabarabhāṣya
Sahānumaranaviveka
Sankhayanagṛhyasutra
Sankhāyanasrautasūtra
Sahā.
Sankh.
Sankha(smrti)
Sankh.gr.
Sankh.śr.
Sarv.
Sat.
Sat.Br.
Sarvajñanārāyaṇa's commentary on Manusmrti
Śätätapa Satapathabrāhmaṇa
342
Say.
SBE
SBH
Sdhp. Siv.P.
Sk.P.
Sm.A.
Sm.C.
Sm.M.
Śr.kosa
SS
sū.
Subh.
Suś.
T1, T2, T3
Tait.Ãr.
Tait.Br.
Tait.Sam.
Tait.Up.
TD
TMSSM Trik.
Ujj.
Vaikh.
Stridharmapaddhati
Commentary by Sāyaṇa
Sacred Books of the East edition
Sacred Books of the Hindus edition Stridharmapaddhati Śivapurāṇa Skandapurāṇa
Smṛtyarthasara
Smrticandrika
Smṛtimuktaphala
Śrautakosa
Smṛtīņām samuccayaḥ
sutra
Subhāṣitaratnabhāṇḍāgāram
Suśrutasūtra
MSS of Stridharmapaddhati from Thanjavur (see
appendix)
Taittiriyāraṇyaka
Taittirīyabrāhmaṇa
Taittiriyasamhitā
Taittiriyopanisad
Thanjavur Descriptive Catalogue (see Sastri) Tanjore Maharaja Serfoji's Sarasvati Mahal edition Trikandamanḍana
Ujjvalā
Varāhapurāṇa
Vasistha(dharmasutra)
Vaikhānasasmārtasūtra
Vait.
Vaitanasutra
Vam.P.
Vamanapurāṇa
Var.P.
Vas.
Vay.P.
Vāyupurāṇa
Vim.
Vir.A.
Vir.P.
Vir.S.
Vis.P.
Vis.Sm.
VSM
Yājñ. Yatidh.
ZDMG
Vimanavatthu
Viramitrodaya ähnikaprakāśa
Viramitrodaya püjāprakāśa
Viramitrodaya samskāraprakāśa
Viṣṇupurāna
Viṣṇusmrti
Vaidika Samsodhana Mandala edition
Yajnavalkya(smṛti)
Yatidharmaprakāśa
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen
Gesellschaft

## Bibliography
Texts and translations
(* Denotes the primary edition, cited in bibliographic notes unless other- wise indicated.)
Abhijñānasakuntalam
Sanskrit text with English tr. and critical notes in C. R. Devadhar, Works of Kālidāsa, vol. 1 (Dramas), Delhi etc. (1966), reprint 1977.
Agnipurāṇa
Sanskrit text ed. B. Upadhyāya, KSS no. 174, Varanasi 1966. English tr. M.N. Dutt, 2 vols., ChSS no. 54, Varanasi 1967.
Aitareyāranyaka
Sanskrit text and English tr. A.B. Keith, Anecdota Oxoniensia, Oxford 1909.
Aitareyabrāhmaṇa
Sanskrit text with Sāyaṇa commentary, ed. Kāśinātha Sastry Agase, 2 vols., Ān.no.32, Pune 1896.*
Sanskrit text and English tr. M. Haug, 2 vols., Bombay 1863.
English tr. A.B. Keith, HOS no.25, Cambridge, Mass. 1920.
Amarakosa of Amarasimha
Sanskrit text and French tr. A. Loiseleur-Deslongchamps, 2 parts in 1 vol., Paris 1839.
Angiraḥsmrti
See Smrtīnām samuccayaḥ.
Anguttaranikāya
Pali text ed. E. Hardy, 5 vols., PTS, London 1899.
Aparárka
See Yajnavalkyasmṛti (Ăn.).
Āpastambadharmasūtra
Sanskrit text with extracts from Haradatta's commentary, the Ujjvalā, ed. G. Bühler, Bombay 1932.
Sanskrit text with Haradattamisra's commentary, the Ujjvalā, ed. A. Chinnasvami Sastri and A. Ramanatha Sastri, KSS no. 93, Benares 1932.
English tr. G. Bühler (1879), SBE reprint, Delhi 1975. Apastambagṛhyasūtra
Sanskrit text with extracts from the commentaries of Haradatta and Sudarsanācārya, ed. M. Winternitz, Vienna 1887.*
Sanskrit text with two commentaries, the Anakula of Haradatta Miśra

344
Stridharmapaddhati
and the Tatparyadarśana of Sudarsanācārya, ed. A. Chinnasvami Sastri, KSS no.59, Benares 1928.
English tr. H. Oldenberg (1892), SBE reprint, Delhi 1967.
Åpastambasmṛti
See Smṛtiņām samuccayaḥ.
Apastambasrautasūtra
Sanskrit text with Rudradatta's commentary, ed. R. Garbe, 3 vols., Calcutta 1882, 1885, 1903.
German tr. W. Caland, 2 vols., (1921) Amsterdam 1924.
Arthasangrahaḥ of Laugakṣi Bhaskara
Sanskrit text with Ramesvara's commentary, ed. Nārāyaṇa Rāma Acarya, N.S., Bombay 1950.
Arthasästra of Kautilya
Sanskrit text crit. ed. R.P. Kangle, Bombay 1960.
English tr. R.P. Kangle, Bombay 1963.
Aṣṭādhyāyi of Panini
Sanskrit text edited, tr. and explained with reference to the commen- .taries, by S.C. Vasu (1891), 2 vols., reprint Delhi etc. 1977.*
Sanskrit text with the Käsikävṛtti ed. D. Shastri and K.P. Shukla, 6 vols., Varanasi 1965-7.
Astängahrdaya of Vägbhata
Sanskrit text with the commentary of Arunadatta, ed. A.M. Kunte, 2 vols., Bombay 1880.
Asvalayanagṛhyasutra
Sanskrit text with Nārāyaṇa commentary, ed. Gaṇeśaśāstrī Gokhale, Än.no.105, Pune 1978.
English tr. H. Oldenberg (1886), SBE reprint, Delhi 1967.
Asvalayanasrautasūtra
Sanskrit text with commentary of Gargya Nārāyaṇa, ed. R. Vidyaratna, Bibl. Ind., Calcutta 1874.*
Agnihotracandrikā: Sanskrit text of Asv.sr. with bhasya of Devatvāta and vrtti of Gärgya Nārāyaṇa, Ān.no.87, Pune 1921.
English tr. H. Ranade, part 1, Poona 1981.
Atrismrti
See Strīnām samuccayaḥ
Atharvavedasamhitā
Sanskrit text ed. S.D. Satvalekar, Bombay 1957.
English tr. W.D. Whitney, 2 vols., HOS, Cambridge, Mass. 1905. English tr. M. Bloomfield (1897), reprint Delhi 1964.
Bālambhaṭṭī
See Yajnavalkyasmṛti.
Baudhayanadharmasutra
Sanskrit text ed. E. Hultzsch, ZDMG VIII.4, Leipzig 1884.*

Bibliography
345
Sanskrit text with Govindasvamin's commentary, ed. Chinnasvami Sastri, KSS no. 104, Benares 1934.
English tr. G. Bühler (1882), SBE reprint, Delhi 1965.
Baudhayanagṛhyaparibhāṣāsūtra
See Baudhayanagṛhyasutra.
Baudhayanagṛhyapariśiṣṭasūtra
Sanskrit text and English tr. in Selections from the Baudhāyanagṛhya- parisistasutra by P.N.U. Harting, Amersfoort 1922.
Baudhayanagṛhyaseṣasutra
See Baudhayanagṛhyasutra.
Baudhayanagṛhyasūtra
Sanskrit text including Baudhāyanagṛhyaparibhāṣāsūtra and Baudhā- yanagṛhyaseṣasutra, ed. R. Shama Sastri, Mysore Sanskrit Series 32/55, Mysore 1920.
Baudhāyanasrautasūtra
Sanskrit text ed. W. Caland, 3 vols., Bibl. Ind., Calcutta 1904-24.
Bhagavadgitā
Sanskrit text ed. S.K. Belvalkar, reprint from BORI crit. edn. of the Mahabharata, Poona 1968.
Bhāgavatapurāṇa
Sanskrit text and French tr. E. Burnouf, 5 vols., vol.V by M., Hauvette- Besnault and Le R.P. Roussel, Paris 1840-98.
Bhojanasūtra
See Paraskaragrhyasutra, parisistam.
Brahmapurāṇa
Sanskrit text, An.no.28, Pune 1895.
Bṛhadaranyakopaniṣad
Sanskrit text crit. ed. V.P. Limaye and R.D. Vadekar, in Eighteen Principal Upanisads, vol.I, VSM, Pune 1958.*
Sanskrit text with commentaries of Sankara and Anandagiri, Kasi 1936. Bṛhatsamhita of Varāhamihira
Sanskrit text and English tr. V. Subrahmanya Sastri and V.M. Rama- krishna Bhat, 2 vols., Bangalore 1947.*
Sanskrit text ed. H. Kern, Bibl.Ind., Calcutta 1865.
Sanskrit text with commentary of Utpala, ed. S. Dvivedī, 2 vols., Benares 1895, 1897.
Buddhacarita of Asvaghosa
Sanskrit text and English tr. E.B. Cowell (1894), reprint Delhi 1977. Carakasamhita of Agniveśa
Sanskrit text and English tr. with a critical exposition based on Cakra- pāṇidatta's commentary, vol.I, R.K. Sharma, ChSS, Varanasi 1976.

346
Stridharmapaddhati
Caturvargacintamani of Hemådri
Sanskrit text ed. Y. Bhaṭṭācārya and K. Tarkaratne, 2 vols., Bibl.Ind., Calcutta 1879.
Dakṣasmṛti
See Smrtiņām samuccayaḥ.
Dharmakosa
Encyclopaedia of religious law (dharmasastra), ed. Lakshmanshastri Joshi, Prajñapāṭhasālāmaṇḍala, Vai. Vol.I: Vyavahārakāṇḍa, 3 parts, 1937-41; Vol.II: Upanisatkanda, 4 parts, 1950-3; Vol.III: Samskara- kända, 3 parts, 1959-81.
Dharmākūta of Tryambakarāyamakhin
Sanskrit commentary on the Rāmāyaṇa in six vols. Vol.I: Balakanda, Shri Vani Vilas, Srirangam, 1916; Vol.II: Ayodhyākāṇḍa, 2 parts, Shri Vani Vilas, Srirangam, 1924, 1926; Vol.III: Aranyakanda, ed. K.S. Subrahmanya Sastry, TMSSM, Thanjavur, 1955; Vol.IV: Kiskindhā- kända, ed. K. Vasudeva Sastri, TMSSM; Vol.V: Sundarakanda, ed. T. Chandrasekharan, TMSSM, Madras 1951; Vol.VI: Yuddhakāṇḍa, ed. P.V. Varadarāja Šarmā, TMSSM, Thanjavur 1964.
Dharmaśāstrasamgraha
Collection of twenty-six smṛtis ed. Jīvānanda Vidyasagara Bhaṭṭācārya (Jiv.), 2 vols., Calcutta 1876.
Gautamadharmasira
Sanskrit text, Gautamapranītadharmasūtrāni, with Haradatta's com- mentary, Än.no.61, Pune 1966.*
Sanskrit text with Haradatta's commentary, ed. U.C. Pandey, KSS no.172, Varanasi. 1966.
Sanskrit text with Maskarin's commentary, ed. L. Srinivasacharya, Mysore 1917.
Sanskrit text, Śrīgautamadharmasastram, ed. A.F. Stenzler, London
1876.
English tr. G. Bühler (1879), SBE reprint, Delhi 1975.
Gobhilagrhyasutra
Sanskrit text ed. Candra Kanta Tarkālaṇkāra, 2 vols. in 1, Bibl.Ind., 2nd edn., Calcutta 1908.
English tr. H. Oldenberg (1892), SBE reprint, Delhi 1967.
Gobhilasmrti
See Smrtinăm samuccayah.
Grhyasangraha of Gobhilaputra
Appendix to the Gobhilagṛhyasutra, Sanskrit text ed. C. Tarkālankära, Bibl. Ind., 2nd edn., Calcutta 1910.
Harivamsa
Sanskrit text as in crit. edn. of Mahabharata by V.S. Sukthankar et al., BORI, Poona 1976.
Bibliography
347
Hiranyak eśigrhyasutra
Sanskrit text with extracts from Matrdatta's commentary, ed. J. Kirste, Vienna 1889.
English tr. H. Oldenberg (1892), SBE reprint, Delhi 1967.
Hiranyakeśisrautasūtra
Sanskrit text with commentaries of Gopinatha and Mahadeva, ed. K.S.Agăse, Ān.no.53, 9 parts, Pune 1909–30.
Isopanisad
Sanskrit text crit. ed. V.P. Limaye and R.D. Vadekar, in Eighteen Principal Upanisads, vol.I, VSM, Pune 1958.
English tr. S. Radhakrishnan in The Principal Upaniṣads (1953), London 1974.
English tr. R.E. Hume in The Thirteen Principal Upanishads, 2nd edn. (1931), London 1971.
Jaiminīyasūtra
Sanskrit text with Sabara's commentary, ed. M. Nyayaratna as The Mimämsä Darsana, 2 vols., Bibl. Ind., Calcutta 1889.*
Sanskrit text and English tr. M.L. Sandal, SBH reprint, New York 1974. English tr. of Jaiminīyasūtra with Sabara's commentary, in Shabara- bhāṣya by G. Jha, 3 vols., GOS, Baroda 1933, 1934, 1936.
Jayākhyasamhitā
Sanskrit text crit. ed. E. Krishnamacharya, GOS no.54, Baroda 1931. Kadambari of Banabhaṭṭa
Sanskrit text with the commentaries of Bhanucandra and Siddhacandra, ed. K.P. Parab, N.S., Bombay 1890.
English tr. C.M. Ridding, London 1896.
Kamasutra of Vatsyāyana
Sanskrit text with the commentary of Yasodhara, ed. G.D. Shastri, KSS no.29 Benares 1929.
English tr. S.C. Upadhyaya, Bombay 1961.
English tr. with extracts from Kokašāstra, Anangaranga etc., by I. Sinha, London 1980.
Käsikävṛtti of Vamana Jāyāditya
Sanskrit text with the commentaries of Jinendrabuddhipāda and Haradattamisra ed. D. Shastri and K.P. Shukla, 6 vols., Varanasi 1965-7.
Käthakasamhitā
Sanskrit text ed. L. von Schroeder, 3 vols., Leipzig 1900-10.
Kathopanisad
Sanskrit text crit. ed. V.P. Limaye and R.D. Vadekar, in Eighteen Principal Upanisads, vol.I, VSM, Pune 1958.
Kātyāyanasmṛti
See Dharmasastrasamgraha (Jīv.).

348
Katyayanasrautasutra
Stridharmapaddhati
Sanskrit text with extracts from the commentaries of Karka and Yājñika- deva, ed. A. Weber (1859), ChSS no.104, Varanasi 1972.
English tr. H.G. Ranade, Poona 1978.
Kauṣitakibrāhmaṇa (also called Sankhayanabrāhmaṇa)
Sanskrit text with the commentary of Udaya, crit. ed. E.R. Sreekrishna Sarma, 3 vols., Wiesbaden 1968-76.
English tr. A.B. Keith, HOS no.25, Cambridge, Mass. 1920.
Kumārasambhava of Kālidāsa
Sanskrit text crit. ed. Süryakanta, Delhi 1962.
English tr. by R.T.H. Griffith, 2nd edn., London 1879.
Kurmapurāṇa
Sanskrit text crit. edn. and English tr. A.S. Gupta, Kashiraj Trust, Varanasi 1972.
Laghusātātapasmṛti
See Smrtīnām samuccayah.
Laghvāśvalāyanasmṛti
See Smṛtīņām samuccayaḥ.
Lingapurāna
Sanskrit text ed. P. Tarkaratna et al., Calcutta 1890.
Mahābhārata
Sanskrit text crit. ed. V.S. Sukthankar et al., 19 vols., BORI, Poona 1933-9; 6 vols. of Pratika-index, 1967-72.*
Sanskrit text as constituted in the crit. edn., 4 vols., Poona 1971–5.* English tr. (incomplete) J.A.B. van Buitenen, 3 vols., Chicago and London: vol.I (1973), Phoenix edn. 1980; vol.II (1975), Phoenix edn. 1981; vol.III, 1978.
English tr. (K.M. Ganguli) ed. P.C. Roy, 12 vols., Calcutta 1883–96. Mahābhāṣya of Patanjali
Sanskrit text ed. L.F. Kielhorn, 3rd edn. by K.V. Abhyankar, 3 vols., BORI, Poona 1962-72.*
Sanskrit text and English tr. K.C. Chatterji, Calcutta 1957.
Mahābhāṣya pradīpa vyākhyānāni: Sanskrit text ed. M.S. Narasimha- charya, with the commentaries of Kaiyata and Nageśa, and French tr. P. Filliozat, adhyāya 1, Pondichery 1973.
Maitrāyaṇīsamhitā
Sanskrit text ed. L. von Schroeder, Leipzig 1881.
Mänasollāsa of Somesvara (also called Abhiläṣitārthacintamani)
Sanskrit text ed. G.K. Shrigondekar, 3 vols., GOS nos. 28,84,138; Baroda 1925, 1939, 1961.

Bibliography
349
Mänavagṛhyasutra
Sanskrit text with the commentary of Aṣṭāvakra, ed. R.H. Sastri, GOS no.35, Baroda 1926.
English tr. M.J. Dresden, Groningen 1941.
Mänavasrautasūtra
Sanskrit text ed. F. Knauer, St. Petersbourg 1900.
Manusmrti
Sanskrit text with the commentaries of Medhätithi, Sarvajñanārāyaṇa, Kullūka, Raghavananda, Nandana, Rāmacandra and Govindarāja, ed. V.N. Mandlik, Bombay 1886.*
Sanskrit text with Kulluka's commentary, N.S., 2 edns., Pune 1929, 1946. Sanskrit text with Kulluka's commentary, with introduction, parisista and index by Gopala Sastri Nene, ChSS, Benares 1935. English tr. G. Bühler (1886), SBE reprint, Delhi 1979.
Märkandeyapurana
Sanskrit text ed. K.M. Banerjea, Calcutta 1862.
English tr. F.E. Pargiter, Calcutta 1904.
Matsyapurāna
Sanskrit text, Ān.no.54, Poona 1907.
English tr. B.C. Majumdar, Delhi 1972.
Mimāmsäkośa
Dictionary of mīmāmsā technical terms, ed. Svāmī Kevalānandasaras- vati, 7 vols., Prajñapāṭhaśālāmandala, Vai 1952–66.
Mitākṣarā of Vijñānesvara
See Yajnavalkyasmṛti.
Mudrārākṣasa of Visakhadatta
Sanskrit text with Dhundhiraja's commentary and English tr. M.R. Kale, 4th revised edn., Bombay 1927.
Mudritakumudacandraprakarana of Yasascandra
Sanskrit text, Jainayasovijayagranthamālā 8, Benares 1906.
Nimayasindhu of Kamalākarabhatta
Sanskrit text ed. Nārāyaṇa Rāma Acarya, N.S. 5th edn., Bombay 1949. Nyāyakośa
Dictionary of technical terms of Indian philosophy, ed. B. Jhalakikar, revised V. Abhyankar, Poona 1928.
Padmapurāṇa
Sanskrit text ed. V.N. Mandlik, 4 vols., An., Pune 1893-4. Parāśaramädhavīya
Sanskrit text of the Parāśarasmrti with the commentary of Madhava- cārya, ed. V.S. Islāmapurkar, vols. I and II, 4 parts, Bombay 1893-1906.* Sanskrit text of the Parasarasmrti with the commentary of Madhava-

350
Strīdharmapaddhati
cārya, ed. Candrakanta Tarkālaṁkāra (1893–9), Bibl.Ind., reprint Calcutta 1973-4.
Parăsarasmrti
See Parāśaramādhaviya.
Paraskaragṛhyasutra
Sanskrit text with the five commentaries of Karkopādhyāya, Jayarāma, Harihara, Gadadhara; and appendixes Vapyadipratiṣṭakandika, Śauca sūtra, Snānasūtra, Śrāddhasutra, and Bhojanasutra, with commentaries; ed. M.G. Bakre, Bombay 1917.
English tr. H. Oldenberg (1886), SBE reprint, Delhi 1967.
Rāmāyana of Valmiki
Sanskrit text ed. S. Kuppuswami Sastrigal et al., 2nd edn., Madras 1958.* Sanskrit text crit. ed. G.H. Bhatt et al., 7 vols., Baroda 1960–75. English tr. H.P. Shastri (1953-9), 3 vols., London 1962, 1969 (2nd edn.), 1976 (3rd edn.).
Rgvedasamhita
Sanskrit text with the commentary of Sāyaṇācārya, VSM, 2nd crit. edn., 5 vols., Pune 1972-.*
Sanskrit text with the commentary of Sayanācārya, ed. F. Max Müller, 2nd edn., 6 vols., London 1890–2.
English tr. R.T.H. Griffith (1889), 2nd rev. edn., Delhi 1976.
Śabarabhāṣya
See Jaiminiyasūtra.
Sahānumaranaviveka of Anantarāma
Sanskrit text ed. J.D.M. Derrett, 'Anantarama's defence of suttee (c. 1818-1820)' in Our Heritage, Calcutta Sanskrit College Research Series no. CXIX, 150th Anniversary Volume 1980.
Sähendravilāsa of Sridhara Venkatesa (Ayyāvāl)
Sanskrit text ed. with historical introduction by V. Raghavan, Tiruchi 1952.
Sankhasmrti
See Smṛtīņām samuccayaḥ.
Sänkhāyanabrāhmaṇa
See Kauṣitakibrāhmaṇa.
Sänkhāyanagṛhyasūtra
Sanskrit text crit. ed. S.R. Sehgal, Delhi 1960.
English tr. H. Oldenberg (1886), SBE reprint, Delhi 1967.
Sānkhāyanaśrautasūtra
Sanskrit text with the commentaries of Varadattasuta Ānartîya and Govinda, crit. edn. A. Hillebrandt, 4 vols., Bibl.Ind., Calcutta 1888–99.
Saptasataka of Hala (also called Gathāsaptasati)
Sanskrit text with English tr. R. Basak, Calcutta 1971.

Bibliography
351
Śatapathabrāhmaṇa
Sanskrit text with extracts from the commentaries of Sayana, Hari- svamin and Dvivedaganga, ed. A. Weber, Berlin 1855. English tr. J. Eggeling (1882-1900), 5 vols., SBE reprint, Delhi 1972–8.
Śivapurāṇa
Sanskrit text with Hindi tr. by Rama Sarma, Bareli 1966.
English tr. J.L. Shastri and A. Kunst, 4 vols., Delhi 1970.
Skandapurāna
Sanskrit text in 7 vols., folio edn., Venkatesvara Press, Bombay 1909–11. Ślokavārtika of Kumārilabhaṭṭa
Sanskrit gloss on Sabara's commentary on Jaiminiyasūtra I, ed. G. Jha, Bibl.Ind. no.138, Calcutta 1900.
Smṛticandrikā of Devannabhatta
Sanskrit text ed. L. Srinivāsācārya; vol.I, samskāra; vol.II, ähnika; vol.III, parts i and ii, vyavahāra; Mysore 1914-16.*
English tr. J.R. Gharpure, 3 vols. (āhnika; vyavahāra, parts ii and iii), Bombay 1946, 1950, 1952.
Smṛtimuktāphala of Vaidyanathadikṣita
Sanskrit text ed. J.R. Gharpure; vol.I, varṇāśramadharma; vol.II, ähnika; Bombay 1937-8.
Smṛtīnām samuccayaḥ
Collection of twenty-six prose smṛtis, Ān.no.48, Pune 1929. Smrtyarthasara of Śrīdhara
Sanskrit text, Ān. no.70, Pune 1912.
Śrautakosa
Encyclopaedia of Vedic sacrificial ritual, ed. C.G. Kashikar, R.N. Dan- dekar et al., VSM, Poona: vol.1, parts i and ii, 1958; vol.II, parts i and ii, 1962, 1973.
Subhāṣitaratnabhāṇḍāgāram
Collection of verses selected by K.P. Paraba (1880), 5th revised edn. by W.L.S. Pansikar, Bombay 1911.
Suśrutasamhitā
Sanskrit text with Hindi commentary by K. Ambikadatta, 2 vols., KSS no.156, Benares 1954, 1959.
English tr. by K.K. Bhishagratna, 3 vols., ChSS, 2nd edn., Varanasi 1963. Taittiriyāranyakam
Sanskrit text with Sayana's commentary, ed. Bābā Sastri Phadke, 2 vols., Ān.no.36, Pune 1897-8.
Taittiriyabrāhmaṇa
Sanskrit text with Sayaṇa's commentary, ed. N.B. Godbole, 3 vols., Ān.no.37, Pune 1898.
352
Taittiriyasamhitā
Strīdharmapaddhati
Sanskrit text with Sayaṇa's commentary, 9 vols., An.no.42, Pune 1900-8.
English tr. A.B. Keith, 2 vols., HOS nos. 18-19, Cambridge, Mass. 1914.
Taittiriyopanisad
Sanskrit text crit. ed. V.P. Limaye and R.D. Vadekar, in Eighteen Principal Upanisads, vol.I, VSM, Pune 1958.
Tantravārtika of Kumārilabhatta
Sanskrit gloss on Sabara's commentary on Jaiminiyasūtra II-III, ed. Gangadhara Sästrī, 2 vols., Benares 1903.
English tr. G. Jha, 2 vols., Bibl.Ind. no.161, Calcutta 1924.
Trikändamandana of Bhaskara Misra
Sanskrit text with an anonymous commentary, ed. Candrakanta Tar- kālankära Bhattacārya, 3 fascs. in 1 vol., Bibl. Ind., Calcutta 1898- 1903.
Tuptikā of Kumārilabhaṭṭa
Sanskrit gloss on Sabara's commentary on Jaiminiyasūtra IV onwards, ed. Gangadhara Śāstrī, 4 fascs., ChSS, Benares 1903-4.
Ujjvalā of Haradattamiśra
See Apastambadharmasutra.
Vaikhānasasmārtasūtra
Sanskrit text crit. ed. W. Caland, Bibl. Ind. no.205, Calcutta 1927. English tr. by W. Caland, Bibl.Ind. no.207, Calcutta 1929. Vaitānasutra
Sanskrit text crit. ed. with German tr. R. Garbe, London 1878.
Vāmanapurāṇa
Sanskrit text crit. ed. with English tr. A.S. Gupta, Kashiraj Trust, Varanasi 1968.
Varāhapurāna
Sanskrit text ed. Hrṣikeśa Śāstrī, Bibl.Ind., Calcutta 1893. Vasisthadharmasūtra
Sanskrit text ed. A.A. Führer, Poona 1930.
English tr. G. Bühler (1882), SBE reprint, Delhi 1965.
Vāyupurāṇa
Sanskrit text, An.no.49, Pune 1905.
Vimanavatthu
Pali text ed. E.R. Gooneratne; see Khuddhanikaya, Suttapitaka, PTS, London 1886.
Viramitrodaya of Mitramiśra
Sanskrit text ed. P.N. Sarma, ChSS 30/31/40, Benares: samskāra- prakāśa 1906, 1913; ähnikaprakāśa 1913; püjāprakāśa 1913.

Visnupurāna
Bibliography
353
Sanskrit text with the commentary of Śrīdharasvāmin, ed. Jīvānanda Vidyasagara, Calcutta 1882.
English tr. H.H. Wilson, ed. F. Hall, 6 vols., London 1864-70.
Visnusmrti
Sanskrit text with extracts from the commentary of Nandapandita,
ed. J. Jolly (1881), ChSS no.95, Varanasi 1962.*
Sanskrit text with Nandapandita's commentary, ed. V. Krishna- macharya, 2 vols., Adyar 1964.
English tr. J.-Jolly (1880), SBE reprint, Delhi 1977.
Vṛddhahārītasmṛti
See Smṛtīņām samuccayaḥ.
Yatidharmaprakāśa of Vasudevāśrama
Sanskrit text crit. ed. with introduction, annotated translation and ap- pendices, P. Olivelle, 2 parts, Vienna 1976, 1977.
Yajnavalkyasmrti
Sanskrit text with the Mitākṣarā commentary, 5th edn. by N.R. Acharya, N.S., Bombay 1949.*
Sanskrit text with Apararka's commentary, 2 vols., An.no. 46, Poona
1903-4.
English tr. (ācāra only) with the Mitäkṣara commentary and Bālam- bhaṭṭī gloss, by S.C. Vidyarṇava (1918), SBE vol.21, reprint New York 1974.
English tr. of Yājñ. with the Mitäkṣarā and the Viramitrodaya of Mitramiśra, by J.R. Gharpure, 2 parts, Bombay 1936-7.
Secondary literature
Abbott, J.E. (tr.) Bahina Bäi: a Translation of her Autobiography and Verses
(The Poet-Saints of Maharashtra, no.5), Poona 1929.
Alston, A.J. (tr.) The Devotional Poems of Mirabai, Delhi 1980.
Altekar, A.S. The Position of Women in Hindu Civilisation from Prehistoric
Times to the Present Day (2nd edn. 1959), Delhi 1978.
Aufrecht, T. (ed.) Catalogus Catalogorum: an Alphabetical Register of San-
skrit Works and Authors (CC) 3 vols., Leipzig 1891-1903.
Ardener, E. 'Belief and the problem of women', in Perceiving Women, ed.
S. Ardener, London 1975.
Ardener, S. (ed.) Perceiving Women, London 1975.
Bahadur, K.P. The Rasikapriya of Keshavadasa, Delhi 1972.
Bennett, L. Dangerous Wives and Sacred Sisters: Social and Symbolic Roles
of High-Caste Women in Nepal, New York 1983.

354
Strīdharmapaddhati
Bhandarkar, R. G. ‘History of child-marriage', ZDMG, vol. 47, Leipzig
1893, pp. 143-56.
Bhardwaj, S.M. Hindu Places of Pilgrimage in India: a Study in Cultural
Geography (1973), Berkeley 1983.
Bloomfield, M. 'The dohada or craving of pregnant women', JAOS, vol.lx,
part 1, 1920, pp.1-24.
· (tr.) Hymns of the Atharva Veda, together with Extracts from the Ritual Books and the Commentaries (1897), reprint Delhi 1964(1).
A Vedic Concordance (1906), reprint Delhi 1964(2).
Bodewitz, H.W. Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa I, 1–65, Translation and Commentary;
with a Study, Agnihotra and Prāṇāgnihotra, Leiden 1973.
The Daily Evening and Morning Offering (Agnihotra) according to the Brahmanas, Leiden 1976.
Böhtlingk, O. and Roth, R. Sanskrit Wörterbuch, 7 vols., St. Petersburg
1855-75.
Brockington, J.L. 'Guarded by grass: a Rāmāyaṇa motif and some Western
parallels', Indologica Taurinensia, forthcoming..
Brown, W. Norman, 'Duty as truth in ancient India', in India and Indology: Selected Articles by W. Norman Brown, ed. R. Rocher, Delhi 1978. Bühler, G. (ed.) Apastambiyadharmasutram: Apastamba's Aphorisms on the Sacred Laws of the Hindus edited with Extracts from Haradatta's Com- mentary; the Ujjvalä, 3rd edn., Bombay 1932.
—(tr.) The Sacred Laws of the Aryas: as Taught in the Schools of Apa- stamba, Gautama, Vasishtha and Baudhāyana; vol.I, Apastamba and Gautama (1879), SBE reprint, Delhi 1975; vol.II, Vasishtha and Bau- dhāyana (1882), SBE reprint, Delhi 1965.
-(tr.) The Laws of Manu, translated with Extracts from Seven Commen-
taries (1886), SBE reprint, Delhi 1979.
Bühneman, G. Budha-Kausika's Rāmarakṣāstotra: a Contribution to the
Study of Sanskrit Devotional Poetry, Vienna 1983.
Burnell, A.C. A Classified Index to the Sanskrit MSS in the Palace at Tanjore,
London 1880.
Caplan, P. 'Ascetics in Western Nepal', The Eastern Anthropologist (26),
1973, pp.173-82.
Carstairs, G.M. The Twice-Born: a Study of a Community of High-Caste
Hindus, Bombay 1971.
Chaki-Sircar, M. Feminism in a Traditional Society: Women of the Manipur
Valley, Delhi 1984.
Colebrooke, H.T. 'Description of a species of ox named gayal', Asiatick Researches: or Transactions of the Society instituted in Bengal for En-

Bibliography
355
quiring into the History and Antiquities, the Arts, Sciences, & Liter- ature of Asia, vol. VIII, Calcutta 1805, pp.486-501.
Cone, M. and Gombrich, R.F. The Perfect Generosity of Prince Vessantara:
a Buddhist Epic, Oxford 1977.
Das, R.M. Women in Manu and His Seven Commentators, Varanasi 1962. David, Rev. C. Drawings of the Costumes of the Southern Peninsula of India by a Native of Tanjore. Explanation of the Several Figures, their Cast, Language etc. by the Revd. Christian David, Colombo 1815. [Box 15; The Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine, warehouse], Denton, Lynn Teskey 'Purity and power: dimensions of female asceticism
in the Hindu tradition', D. Phil. thesis, Univ. of Oxford, 1988. Derrett, J.D.M. Dharmasastra and Juridical Literature, part of vol.IV in
A History of Indian Literature, ed. Jan Gonda, Wiesbaden 1973(1). History of Indian Law (Dharmasastra), Handbuch der Orientalistik, Zweite Abteilung, III Band, 1 Abschnitt, Leiden/Köln 1973(2). -What the dharmaśāstra has to say about dowry', in Studies in Dharma-
sāstra, ed. R.W. Lariviere, Calcutta 1984.
Devahuti, D. Harsha: a Political Study, Oxford 1970.
Dimmitt, C. ‘Sītā: mother goddess and sakti', in The Divine Consort: Radha and the Goddesses of India, ed. J.S. Hawley and D.M. Wulff, Berkeley 1982, pp.210-23.
Dumont, P.-É. L'Agnihotra: Description de l'Agnihotra dans le Rituel Védique
d'après les Śrautasūtras, Baltimore 1939.
The horse-sacrifice in the Taittiriya-Brähmana: the eighth and ninth prapathakas of the third kända of the Taittiriya-Brāhmaṇa with trans- lation', Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, vol.92, no.6, Philadelphia 1948.
Dutt, U.C. The Materia Medica of the Hindus with a Glossary of Indian Plants by George King, revised (2nd edn.) with additions by K.B.L. Sen, K.A. Sen and K.P.K. Sen, Calcutta 1922.
Eggeling, J. (tr.) The Satapatha Brahmana according to the Text of the Madhyandina School (1882-1900), SBE reprint, Delhi: vol.I, 1972; vol.II, 1978; vol.III, 1979; vol.IV, 1978; vol.V, 1978.
Falk, N.A. 'The case of the vanishing nun: the fruits of ambivalence in Indian Buddhism', in Unspoken Worlds: Women's Religious Lives in Non-Western Cultures, ed. N.A. Falk and R.M. Gross, San Francisco 1980.
Finot, L. Les Lapidaires Indiens, Paris 1896.
Fuller, C.J. and Logan, P. The Navaratri festival in Madurai', Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, vol.XLVIII, part 1, 1985, pp.79-110.

356
Stridharmapaddhati
Gaur, A. Women in India, London 1980.
Gharpure, J.R. (tr.) Yäjñavalkyasmṛti with the Mitākṣarā of Vijñānešvara
and the Viramitrodaya of Mitramiśra, 2 parts, Bombay 1936-7.
Gode, P.K. 'Raghunatha, a protégé of Queen Dīpābai of Tanjore and his works: between A.D. 1675 and 1712', Studies in Indian Literary History, vol.II, Bombay 1954.
Studies in the history of dietetics-references to "avaränna" in the Dharmasutras of Baudhayana and Apastamba and the Gṛhyasutra of Āpastamba (between B.C. 500 and A.D. 500)', Studies in Indian Literary History, vol.III, Poona 1956, pp.153-60.
Some notes on the history of soap-nuts, soap and washermen in India-between B.C. 300 and A.D. 1900', Studies in Indian Cultural History, vol.III, BORI, Poona 1969, pp.150–67.
Gombrich, R.F. Precept and Practice: Traditional Buddhism in the Rural
Highlands of Ceylon, Oxford 1971.
Gonda, J. Visnuism and Śivaism: a Comparison, London 1970.
Vedic Ritual: the Non-Solemn Rites', Handbuch der Orientalistik, Abt.2, Band 4, Abschn. 1, Leiden-Köln 1980.
Gopalan, S. Bhomsale Vamsa Caritra, Being the Marathi Historical Inscrip- tion in the Big Temple, Tanjore, Marathi text translated into English by S. Gopalan, into Tamil by V. Śrīnivāsacārī, TMSSM no.46, Thanjavur
1980.
Goswami, R.R.B. Descriptive Catalogue of Marathi Manuscripts and Books in the Tanjore Maharaja Serfoji's Sarasvati Mahal Library, 3 vols., Tanjore 1929, 1932, 1938.
Hardy, F. 'The diary of an unknown Indian girl', Religion, 1980, vol.X. Heesterman, J.C. The Ancient Indian Royal Consecration: the Rājasūya
Described according to the Yajus Texts and Annotated, The Hague 1957. Hemingway, F.R. Madras District Gazetteers: Tanjore, vol.I, Madras 1906. Hiebert, J. Hamper 'Sanskrit poetry by three Vijayanagara queens', Vijaya- nagara-City and Empire: New Currents of Research, ed. A. L. Dalla- piccola in collaboration with S.Z. Lallemant, Wiesbaden 1985.
Hirschon, R. 'Open body/closed space: the transformation of female sexual-
ity', in Defining Females, ed. S. Ardener, London 1978.
Hobson, S. Family Web: a Story of India, London 1978.
Horner, I.B. Women under Primitive Buddhism: Laywomen and Almswomen
(1930), Delhi 1975.
Hume, R.E. (tr.) The Thirteen Principal Upanishads (1921), 2nd revised edn.
1931, London 1971.
Bibliography
357
The Image of Man: the Indian Perception of the Universe through 2000 Years of Painting and Sculpture, Arts Council of Great Britain, London 1982.
Ions, V. Indian Mythology, London 1968.
Jacobson, D. 'The chaste wife', American Studies in the Anthropology of
India, ed. S. Vatuk, Delhi 1978.
Jaini, P.S. The Jaina Path of Purification, Berkeley 1979.
Jameson, A.S. Gangaguru: the Public and Private Life of a Brahman
Community of North India', D.Phil. thesis, Univ. of Oxford, 1976.
Jha, G. (tr.) Shabarabhasya, 3 vols., Baroda 1933, 1934, 1936.
Jīvānanda Vidyasagara Bhatṭācārya (ed.) Dharmaśāstrasamgraha, a collec-
tion of twenty-six smṛtis in 2 vols., Calcutta 1876.
Jolly, J. Medicin, Strassburg 1901.
Kane, P.V. History of Dharmasastra (Ancient and Mediaeval Religious and
Civil Law in India), 2nd edn., 5 vols., Poona 1968-77.
Kashikar, C.G. and Parpola, A. ‘Srauta traditions in recent times', in Agni:
the Vedic Ritual of the Fire Altar, vol.II, pp.232-9; see Staal 1983. Keith, A.B. (tr.) The Veda of the Black Yajus School entitled Taittiriya
Sanhitä, HOS vols. 18-19, Cambridge, Mass. 1914.
King, U. 'The effect of social change on religious self-understanding: women ascetics in modern Hinduism', Changing South Asia: Religion and Society, ed. K. Ballhatchet and D. Taylor, London 1984.
Kinsley, D. 'Blood and death out of place: reflections on the goddess Kali', The Divine Consort: Radha and the Goddesses of India, ed. J.S. Hawley and D.M. Wulff, Berkeley 1982, pp.144-52.
Kishwar, M. and Vanita, R. (eds.) In Search of Answers: Indian Women's
Voices from Manushi, London 1984.
Krishnamachariar, M. History of Classical Sanskrit Literature, Madras 1937. Lal, S.K. Female Divinities in Hindu Mythology and Ritual, Pune 1980. Leslie, I.J. 'The religious role of women in ancient India', M. Phil. thesis,
Univ. of Oxford, 1980.
-Essence and existence: women and religion in ancient Indian texts',
Women's Religious Experience, ed. P. Holden, London 1983(1).
The religious role of women in ancient India: a discussion of the Stridharmapaddhati of Tryambakayajvān, D. Phil. thesis, Univ. of Oxford, 1983(2).
'The power in the home: ambivalent images of the goddess Jyesthā', paper presented to the Second International Conference on South Asian Religious Art Studies (SARAS), Lucknow, 17-21 September 1984.
Google

358
Stridharmapaddhati
-Strisvabhāva: the inherent nature of women', in Oxford University
Papers on India, vol.1, part 1, Delhi 1986.
Losty, J.P. Krishna, A Hindu Vision of God: Scenes from the Life of Krishna Illustrated in Orissan and other Eastern Indian Manuscripts in the British Library, London 1980.
Malamoud, C. 'On the rhetoric and semantics of puruṣārtha', in Way of Life:
King, Householder, Renouncer, ed. T.N. Madan, Delhi 1982.
Mandlik, V.N. (ed.) Mänava-Dharma-Śästra [Institutes of Manu] with the
Commentaries of Medhätithi, Sarvajñanārāyaṇa, Kullüka, Raghavananda, Nandana and Ramachandra; and a Supplement of the Commentary of Govindaraja, Bombay 1886.
McCrindle, J.W. Ancient India as Described in Classical Literature (1901),
reprint Amsterdam 1971.
Menski, W.F. 'Role and ritual in the Hindu marriage', D.Phil. thesis, Univ.
of London, 1984.
Meulenbeld, G.J. The Madhavanidana and its Chief Commentary, Chapters
1-10; Introduction, Translation and Notes, Leiden 1974.
Monier-Williams, Sir M. A Sanskrit-English Dictionary, Etymologically and Philologically Arranged with Special Reference to Cognate Indo-European Languages (1889), Oxford 1976.
Morinis, E.A. Pilgrimage in the Hindu Tradition: a Case Study of West
Bengal, Delhi 1984.
Mysore Supplemental Catalogue (MSC): A [3rd] Supplemental Catalogue of Manuscripts Secured for the Oriental Research Institute, Mysore, during 1941-54, Mysore Oriental Research Institute, 1955.
Nagaswamy, R. Masterpieces of Early South Indian Bronzes, New Delhi
1983.
Nissan, E. 'Recovering practice: Buddhist nuns in Sri Lanka', South Asia
Research, vol.4, no.1, May 1984.
Obeyesekere, G. 'Pregnancy-cravings (dola-duka) in relation to social structure and personality in a Sinhalese village', American Anthro- pologist, vol.65, no.2, April 1963.
O'Flaherty, W.D. The Origins of Evil in Hindu Mythology, Berkeley 1976. Ojha, C. 'Feminine asceticism in Hinduism: its tradition and present con-
dition', Man in India, vol.61, no.3, 1981, pp.254–85.
-'Condition féminine et renoncement au monde dans l'Hindouisme: les communautés monastiques de femmes à Benares', Bulletin de l'Ecole Française d'extrême-Orient, Tome LXXIII, 1984, pp. 197-222.
Okely, J. 'Gypsy women: models in conflict', in Perceiving Women, ed.
S. Ardener, London 1975.

Bibliography
359
Olivelle, P. 'The notion of asrama in the Dharmasūtras', in Wiener Zeit-
schrift für die Kunde Südasiens, vol.XVIII, 1974.
--Vasudevāsrama Yatidharmaprakāsa: a Treatise on World Renunciation, part 1, crit. edn. of Sanskrit text, Vienna 1976; part 2, introduction and translation, Vienna 1977.
-The integration of renunciation by orthodox Hinduism', in Journal
of the Oriental Institute 28:1, Sept. 1978, pp.27-36.
'Renouncer and renunciation in the Dharmasastras, in Studies in the Dharmaśāstras, ed. R. W. Lariviere, Calcutta 1984.
Oppert, G. Lists of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Private Libraries of Southern
India, Madras 1880-5.
Parry, J.P. Caste and Kinship in Kangra, London 1979.
Paul, D.Y. Women in Buddhism: Images of the Feminine in Mahāyāna Tradi-
tion, Berkeley 1979.
Pingree, D. Jyotiḥśästra: Astral and Mathematical Literature, in A History
of Indian Literature, vol.VI, fasc. 4, Wiesbaden 1981.
Postel-Coster, E. 'The Indonesian novel as a source of anthropological data',
in Text and Context, ed. R. K. Jain, Philadelphia 1977.
Radhakrishnan, S. (tr.) The Principal Upanisads (1953), London 1974. Raghavan V. Śähendravilāsa (A Poem on the Life of King Šāhajī of Tanjore
(1684–1710) of Śrīdhara Venkatesa (Ayyāvāl), Tiruchi 1952.
Raghavan, V. and Kunjunni Raja, K. (eds.) New Catalogus Catalogorum. An Alphabetical Register of Sanskrit and Allied Works and Authors (NCC), Madras 1968-: vol.I-V ed. Raghavan; vol.VI ed. Kunjunni Raja; vol. VIII 1974; unpublished material, NCC files, Madras Uni- versity.
Rai, R. and Singh, B. 'Widows of Varanasi', India Today, vol.VIII, no.3,
Delhi 1983.
Ramanujan, A.K. (tr.) Speaking of Śiva (1973), Harmondsworth 1979.
-‘On women saints', in The Divine Consort: Rädhā and the Goddesses of India, ed. J.S. Hawley and D.M. Wulff, Berkeley 1982. Randhawa, M.S. Kangra Paintings on Love, New Delhi 1962. Rao, T.A. Gopinatha, Elements of Hindu Iconography, 2 vols., Madras 1914. Reynell, J. 'Honour, nurture and festivity: aspects of female religiosity amongst Jain women in Jaipur', D.Phil. thesis, Univ. of Cambridge, 1985.
Rowland, B. The Art and Architecture of India: Buddhist, Hindu, Jain, in The Pelican History of Art, ed. N. Pevsner (1953), 3rd revised edn. 1967, Harmondsworth 1970.
Salomon, R. 'Legal and symbolic significance of the "menstrual pollution" of rivers', in Studies in Dharmasastra, ed. R. W. Lariviere, Calcutta 1984.

360
Stridharmapaddhati
Sandal, M.L. (tr.) The Mimämsä Sūtras of Jaimini (1923–25), SBH reprint,
New York 1974.
Sandesara, B.J. ‘Great Hindu women in Gujarat and Saurashtra', in Great Women of India, ed. Swami Madhavananda and R.C. Majumdar, Almora 1953.
Sastri, P.P.S. (ed.) A Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Tanjore Maharaja Serfoji's Sarasvati Mahal Library, Tanjore (TD), 19 vols., Srirangam 1934-.
Sen, Chitrabhanu A Dictionary of the Vedic Rituals based on the Śrauta
and Grhya Sutras (1978), reprint Delhi 1982.
Sethi, S. 'Dowry: a gift of justice', India Today, 15 April 1985, p.57. Sinha, I. The Love Teachings of Kamasutra with Extracts from Koka Shastra, Ananga Ranga and other Famous Indian Works on Love, London 1980. Smith, F.M. 'The Vedic sacrifice in transition: a translation and study of
the Trikändamandana of Bhaskara Miśra', Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Pennsylvania, 1984.
Staal, F. Agni: the Vedic Ritual of the Fire Altar, 2 vols., in collaboration with C.V. Somayajipad and M. Itti Ravi Nambudiri, Berkeley 1983. Strandberg, E. The Modi Documents from Tanjore in Danish Collections,
Wiesbaden 1983.
Stutley, M. and J. Stutley, A Dictionary of Hinduism: its Mythology, Folklore
and Development 1500 B.C.-A.D. 1500, London 1977.
Subramanian, K.R. The Marāṭhā Rājas of Tanjore (1676–1855), Madras
1928.
Takakhav, N.S. The Life of Shivaji Maharaj, Founder of the Maratha Empire, adapted from the Marathi work by K.A. Keluskar, Bombay 1921. Tawney, C.H. The Ocean of Story, Being C.H. Tawney's Translation of Soma-
deva's Kathā Sarit Sägara, ed. N.M. Penzer, 10 vols., London 1924–8. Thapliyal, U.P. Foreign Elements in Ancient Indian Society: 2nd century
B.C. to 7th century A.D. Delhi 1979.
Thieme, P. 'Jungfrauengatte' in Kleine Schriften, Teil II, Wiesbaden 1971. Upadhyaya, S.C. (tr.) Kāmasūtra of Vätsyāyana, Bombay 1961.
Urban, Sylvanus (ed.) The Gentleman's Magazine and Historical Chronicle,
vol.LXIV, part II, 1794.
van Buitenen, J.A.B. (tr.) The Mahābhārata: vols. 1-2, Chicago and London
(Phoenix edn.) 1980, 1981; vol.3, Chicago 1978.
Venkasami Row, T. A Manual of the District of Tanjore in the Madras Pre-
sidency, vol.VIII, Madras 1883.
Vidyārṇava, R.B.S.C. The Daily Practice of the Hindus, Containing the
Morning and Midday Duties (1918), 4th edn., Delhi 1979.
(tr.) See Yajnavalkyasmṛti 1974.

Bibliography
361
Vora, J.H. Kavikāvyakālakalpana, 1945(?); consulted at BORI, Pune. Wilhelm, F. ‘Kaliyuga and time capsule', in Indology and Law: Studies in
Honour of Professor J.D.M. Derrett, Wiesbaden 1982.
Winternitz, M. Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, vol.II (begun by M. Winternitz and completed by A. B. Keith), Oxford 1905.
Wiser, W. H. and C. V. Wiser, Behind Mud Walls 1930-1960. With a Sequel:
the Village in 1970, Berkeley 1971.
Wood, H. Third-class Ticket, London 1980:
Wujastyk, D. 'Notes on traditional Sanskrit teaching', South Asia Research,
May 1981, pp.30-5.
Zimmer, H. The Art of Indian Asia, completed and edited by Joseph Campbell, 2 vols. (2nd edn. 1960; 3rd revised printing 1968), Princeton 1983.

## Index
abhivadana, defined, 157-60 Ablutions, etc., 69-101; urinating and defecating, 69-71; impurities, 71; cleansing, 71-4; sipping, 75-7; clean- ing the teeth, 78-82; ritual bath, 82-8; getting dressed, 88-96; wear- ing the tilaka mark, 96-101; marks for men, 99
Abortion, as fault of wife, 127
ācamanam, see Sipping
Ādiparvan, 211
Adoption of sons, 302
Adorning of the fire, 129; wife's parti-
cipation in, 130
Adultery, 255; punishments for, 255-6 Agastya, 271
Agni, 252-3, 313; and the fire sacrifice,
103, 123
Agnipurāṇa, 153, 154; on wife's serving
meals, 213; on the perfect wife, 180 āḥnikam (daily duties), 44; for a king,
46; for a brahmin householder, 46-7; for women, 47-50. See also Sections IIA, IIB, IIC, IID Aitareyāraṇyaka, 207 Ajanta, paintings at, 92, 94 Altekar, A. S., 101
Amaravati, sculptures of, 94 Angiras, 284
Ankles, women not to show, 92 Anthropology, and religious texts,
325-7, 329
Amusāsanaparvan, 194, 210; on inherent nature of women, 247; on perfect wife, 281-2
Aparärka, 214, 253, 255
Apastambadharmasutra, 136, 140, 142,
144; on salutations, 159; on guests, 183, 184, 185, 196, 208; on Vedic students, 203; on serving food, 217- 18, 219; on left-overs, 143, 223; on post-prandial activity, 230; on colours of clothing, 244; on clothes for love-making, 245; on making love at proper time, 287 Apastambaśākhā, 25, 136 Apastambasmṛti, 244 Apastambasrautasutra, 131
apośana (water sipped from cupped hand
before eating), 223 Āraṇyakaparvan, 195 Ardener, Edwin, 327 Ardener, Shirley, 327
arghya offering, flowers added to, 179 arghyadānam (offering of respect). See
Sun, offering to
artha (worldly commitments), 54 Artists, role of, 92–3
Arundhati, story of, 313
Aryavarta, 216
Asceticism, female: option of, 139, 318; research on, 318; Tryambaka's re- jection of, 318-21
Ascetics: treatment of, 201, 206; dishes
used by, 220; female, 318
āśrama theory: and the householder, 44-5; stages of development, 44, 138-9; and svadharma, 263 Aṣṭāvakra, 268, 319, 320
Āśvalāyanagṛhyasūtra, 143, 145, 273-4;
on things to avoid, 275 Asvamedhikaparvan, on rewards for hos-
pitality, 193
Atharvaveda, 251

364
Atri, 217, 286
Index
aupāsana fire, 134; substitute for house-
holder at, 149 Aurva, 153
Authorship of Stridharmapaddhati, 10- 13; Raghavan on, 10-11; Sastri on, 11; Vora on, 11
avaranna ('inferior food'), 145
Bābāji Bhosle, 13
bali offerings, evening, 235
Bathing, 50; after menstruation, 286.
See also Ritual bath Baudhāyanadharmasutra, on sacred thread, 34, 76; on asrama theory, 44; on cleansing, 74; on bathing, 83; on sacred enclosure, 119; on polygamy, 121; on fire sacrifice, 129- 30; on reciting mantras, 150; on salutations, 157;
157; on behaviour toward teacher, 167; on decorating hearth, 182; on food for guests, 189-90, 209; on eating with one's wife, 216; on evening ritual, 234; on intercourse, 238-9; on adopted sons, 302
Baudhayanasrautasūtra, 131 Bavasäheb, 15, 16
Bennett, Lynn, 138
Betel, 231-2; in love-making, 243 Bhagavadgītā, 264
Bhangāśvana, King, 259-60 Bhāradvāja, 147
Bharhut, sculptures of, 92, 93, 94 Bhaskara Misra, 113, 114 Bhisma, 60-1, 194, 271, 281
Bhuribai, 1, 328
Black Yajur Veda, 25
Bloomfield, M., 154
Bodewitz, H. W., 115, 117
60; as guest, 187, 210; eating with wife, 216; status of, 256; women and funeral pyre, 297–8
brahmavādini, 37
Breasts: covering of, 91–2; in art, 92–5 Breathing, in offering to sun, 150 Bṛhatsamhitā, 267
Brides: adolescent vs. pre-adolescent,
87; nagnikā, 87-8
Britain: reforms by, 1, 3; in Thanjavur,
16
British Library, āhnika duties in MSS of,
48-9
Brother, as substitute for householder,
147, 148
Buddhacarita, on wife's share in sacrifice,
109
Buddhism, 207, 228; and the Veda, 41;
on role of wife, 214; nuns of, 318 Bühler, G., 76, 147, 209; on behaviour
of host, 196-7
Caraka, 69
Castes: and right to sacrifice, 41; punish- ment of lower, 56; care of cows by higher, 68; clothing of, 89; tilaka or pundra marks for, 99; and husband eating with wife, 216; and eating left-overs, 224; and shaving heads of widows, 303
Children: rules for, 34; teaching of, 36;
feeding of, 208-9, 224; of women who broke rules in menstruation, 285-6
Christianity, 4
Cleaning house: before dawn, 59; in the
evening, 231
Cleansing, after urination and defeca- tion, 71-4; after menstruation, 74, 286
Bodice: wearing of, 3, 97, 100, 241; Clothing, for love-making, 244-5
forbidden to widows, 299
Brahman, 223
Brāhmaṇa, 196
brāhmamuhūrta, meaning of, 51
Brahmin: birth of, 36, 37, 38-9; and polygamy, 121; salutations by, 159–
Clouet, Francois, 93
Collyrium, use of, 96, 97
Conclusion, religious duties of women,
318-29; women forbidden to per- form rituals, 321-2; devotion of wife to husband, 322-4; willingness to do

Index
wrong when commanded, 324-5; bearing of treatise on present, 325–9; authority of texts cited, 325-7; actual experience of women, 327–9 Cooking: pure, 100-1; in the evening,
235
Court women, dress of, 92
Cows: use of cow-dung, 59, 60-1; sanctity of, 60; and Śrī, 60-2; care of, 65-7; sin of harming, 66-7; worship of, 67; milking at fire sacri- fice, 130-1
Cremation, of patni with sacred fire,
140-1
Dakṣa, 46–7, 149; on timing of rituals,
178; on afternoon activities, 232 Das, R. M., 251, 270 Daughter: unmarried (kumārī) and ri- tual fire, 145–6, 148; in absence of son, 146
Dawn: rules for rising before, 51; rea-
sons for early rising, 51-3; fire ritual, 102–49; offering to the sun, 149–55. See also Sections IIA and IIB Day: divisions of, 45; for a king, 46; for a brahmin householder, 46-7; for a woman, 47-8; waking, 51 Defecation: purification after, 39, 71-4;
in daily schedule, 49; ritual signi- ficance of, 69; place of, 69–70; prohibited places, 70-1
‘Déjeuner sur l'Herbe, Le' (Manet), 93 Demons: karma of, 265-6; case of
demon priest, 266 Derrett, J.D.M., 23, 24
Descriptive Catalogue.... (Sastri), 11 Devala, 72; on sipping, 75; on clothing,
90
Devaņṇabhaṭṭa, 145, 149
devapüjā (image worship) ritual, 178–80,
182; food for, 181
Dharma, 324
dharma ('righteousness'), 23, 268; and sacrifice, 23; sources of, 24; on daily schedule, 54; as reflection of cosmic
365
law, 263; areas of conflict in women's, 263-4 Dharmākūtā, 3, 10, 11, 12, 18, 96, 317; on tilaka, 98; on offering of food, 180; on inherent nature of women, 250 dharmasastra (religious law), 7, 23-5, 268; literature of, 24; and art, 93; on guests, 187; on eating, 210; on conflict with husband's wishes, 316; and renunciation for women, 318 Dhoti, 91
Dhundhiraja, 10, 12; court poet, 19;
works of, 19
Dipămbā: chief wife of Ekojī, 20; as
patroness, 21-2
Dishes: of leaves, 218; of iron, 220; of earthenware, 220; wooden, 220 Dowry, women's right to, 278–9, n17 Drāhyāyaṇasrautasūtra, 288 Draupadi, 313; on speaking to a para-
purusa, 173-4, 175; treatment of a guest, 201-3; meals served by, 213; on eating left-overs, 224; praise for, 262; conversation of, 280–1 Drawings of the Costumes of the Southern
Peninsular of India. . . ., 95..., Dumont, P. E., 117, 119 Dundhirăja, 11
Dundhivyasa, 11
Duties common to all women, 273–304.
See Section IV
Early morning, sights in, 40, 49, 54-7 Earth: used for cleansing, 71; size of lumps, 72–3; number of lumps, 73 Earthenware, 220
East India Company, 15
Ekojî, 13–14, 15; literary heritage from,
16-17
Elders: saluting of, 156–68; guru, 156–7; abhivādana, 157-60; name used, 160-1; homage to parents-in-law, 161-2; obeisance to husband, 162–3; personal services to, 163–8; evening homage to, 234. See also Section IIC

366
Elephanta caves, Bombay, 30 Ellora, sculptures of, 94
Index
Evening rituals, 234-6; presence of wife at, 234-5; treatment of guests at, 235-6
Fasting, in husband's absence, 81-2 Father, saluting, 156
Feet, wife's homage to husband's, 221–
2, 237
Fire-hall: details of, 116-17, 118; aha-
vaniya, 116, 118; garhapatya, 116, 118; entrance to, 117, 120; paths in, 119-21
Fire sacrifice, 102-49; wife's presence
at, 50; Vedic ritual of, 102; times of, 102-3, 105, 106-7; eligibility for, 103; role of wife in, 107-15; husband and wife in, 108-9, 114-15; where the patni may walk, 115-21; en- closure for, 116-17; which wife is patnī, 121–8; point of participation of patni, 129–31; evening and morn- ing, 131; presence of husband or wife, 132-41; patnī as ritual agent,
141–9; and homage to guests, 196–8 Five great sacrifices, 176-7; time of, 177 Flowers, for image worship, 179 Food: rulings on, 143; offered as sacri- fice, 144, 180; offered to guests, 184, 194; giving of, 188-90, 195-6; pre- pared by wife, 199; serving of, 210- 21; left-overs, 223-4 Forest hermit, 138, 146
Gaṇādhipati (Gaṇapati; Gaṇeśa), 29 Gandhari, 31, 262
Gandharva, the, 252-3
Ganges, 135; water for ritual bathing, 86 Gārhasthya dipikā, 10, 12
Gautama, 34, 67, 80; on äśrama theory, 44; on cleansing, 71; on sipping, 75-6; on clothing, 89; on patni's role in sacrifice, 148; on salutations, 157, 162; on obeisance to husband, 162-3; on guests, 187; on mealtimes, 216, 226
Getting dressed, 88-96; kinds of cloth- ing, 89; men's vs. women's, 89; cloth used, 90-1; parts to be covered, 91-5
Glass bangles, 100
Gobhila, 145; on patni's duty, 147 Gobhilagryasutra, 160
Gode, P. K., 145
Goddesses, fierce vs. gentle, 320 Gods: husbands as, 1, 259, 281, 282, 322, 323; sacrifice to at midday, 177, 180-3; food for, 181, 224 Gonda, J., 106 Govindarāja, 184
Grain, preparation of, 58–9 Grammar: reasons for studying, 40-1;
and question of gender, 42; use of masculine gender to apply to femin- ine, 57
Grass, placing a blade of, 172 grhya fire ritual, 103–4 Grhyasamgraha, 253
Guests: rituals concerning, 50, 235-6; offerings to, 151-2; wife's role con- cerning, 169, 210; hospitality to, 177; preparation of food for, 180, 197; paying homage to, 183; seats for, 184; examples of, 186-8; brah- min as, 187; term defined, 200, 205- 10; order of attending, 208; left- overs from, 224; story of Sudarsana, 310-12. See also Hospitality; Midday rituals
guru: meaning of term, 156–7; relation of Vedic student to, 322; obedience to, 324-5
Half-brother, 148
Haradatta, 34, 35, 76; on foods, 144; on salutations, 160, 161; on timing of rituals, 177; on guests, 196, 208; on alms, 206; on order of feeding, 208; on eating with one's wife, 216; on diners in a row, 221; on post- prandial activity, 230-1
haridrā, used as unguent, 96, 97
Gender, and authorship of texts, 327 Harikeśa, 258
Index
Hariścandra, story of, 307 Hārīta, 34, 36, 38; on containers for food, 220; on owning property, 277 Head, shaving of: by widows, 303-4;
by renouncers, 319
Hearth, wife's role in decorating, 182 Heretics: not to be spoken to, 171; not
to be fed, 207 Himalayas, 135 Hirschon, R., 328
Hobson, Sarah, 59
homa ritual, 106, 107; presence of hus- band and wife at, 131; times of, 177, 178
Hospitality: homage to guests, 183;
timing of, 184; reasons for, 185–8; punishment for neglect of, 188–93; rewards for, 193–6; comparison with fire ritual, 196-8; role of wife in, 198-205, 210; guest vs. casual visitor, 205-10. See also Guests House: cleaning of, 59; smearing of,
59-61; worship of threshold, 63 Household tasks, 168–76 Householder: status of, 44, 45; and
āśrama theory, 44–5; ritual activities of, 45, 54; divisions of day of, 46–7; fire sacrifice of, 102; pilgrimages for- bidden to, 134, 138; substitute for at fire ritual, 147; responsibility for guests, 193
Housework: rules for, 50; before dawn,
58-69
Hsüan-Tsang, 56
Husband: as god, 1, 259, 281, 282, 322, 323; role in fire ritual, 108-9; in polygamy, 121–2; absence from fire sacrifice, 132-3, 136; and expense of ritual fires, 134; reasons for leav- ing home, 135; after wife's death, 141; salutation by wife, 156, 163–8; rights to wife's property, 276–80; wife's duty toward, 305, 321-2; emphasis on demands of, 315-16. See also Wife
Image worship (devapujā), 178-80
367
Impurity: and women, 250-2; of men- struating women, 283; of widows, 303. See also Inherent nature of
women
Indra, brahminicide of, 251, 255 Inherent nature of women, 246–72; accepted view of sinfulness, 246-50; problem of religious instruction, 247, 256, 258, 260-1; purity of, 250-6; unique blessedness, 256-9; con- tradictions in, 261-6; debate on, 267-71; prejudice concerning, 271-2 Ingres, Jean, 93 Initiation: for men, 34, 143-4; for women, 35-6, 37; marriage as, 37, 322; length of study, 37–8 In Search of Answers (Kishwar and
Vanita), 2
Intellectual milieu of Maratha Rajas,
16-23; scholar kings, 17-18; min- isters, 18-19; court poet, 19; women, 19-23 Introduction by Tryambaka, 29-43; in- vocation, 29; introductory verses, 29-33; first verse, 29-31; second, 31-2; third, 32, fourth, 32-3; in- troduction proper, 33-43; on puri- fication, 33-4; on rules for married women, 34–9; on general rules ap- plicable to women, 39-43
Iron, dishes of, 220
Jacobson, D., 20
Jameson, A. S., 325-6 Jaimini: on women's right to sacrifice, 41–3, 110, 112; opponents of, 42; on women's study of the Veda, 112; on polygamy, 123 Jaiminīyasūtra, 269
Jains, 228, 271-2; nuns of, 318 Junior wives: and fire sacrifice, 125-6,
127; precedence of, 127-8 japa recitation, 150; forbidden to
women, 150-1
Jyeṣṭhā, 63; wife's offering to, 177, 225; wife's pre-dinner ritual, 227-9; iden- tity of, 228
Jyotirnibandha, 254

368
Kādambarī, 232
Index
kali age, behaviour of women in, 256-7,
259, 296
Kāmasūtra, 238
Kane, P. V., 94, 147, 218
karma: and birth of female, 256; ful-
filment of, 265-6; of women, 266 Kāsikā, 212–13
Kathopaniṣad, 185; story of Naciketas
from, 186-8; on guests, 195, 207 Kathurājā, 15, 16
Kätyāyana: on sights in morning, 54–6;
on fire sacrifice, 126, 127, 128, 132, 139-40; on cremation of patnī, 141 Kausalya, 162, 214, 271 Kausika, story of, 308–9 Kautilya, 46, 265
King, the day's schedule of, 46; en-
joined behaviour of, 264–5 Kishwar, Madhu, 2, 58 Kṛṣṇa, 281, 324 Krsnayajurveda, 25
kṣaralavana (food used in sacrifice),
144-5
Kullūka, 145, 184, 199, 205; on eating
with one's wife, 216; on svadharma, 263
Kumārila, 112, 113, 115
Kunti, 262, 310, 324
Ladle, use of required, 218-19 Laksmi, 228, 320
Leaves, used to weave dishes, 218 Left-overs, 218, 223 Lingapurana, 228
Madhava, 153, 207, 279
Mahabharata, 31, 60, 172, 319; on cows,
65, 67; on personal services, 163-5; on wife's speaking to unrelated man, 173-4; on guests, 194, 195, 208, 210; story of Uttanka, 211; on wife's serving at meals, 213; on inherent nature of women, 247, 262, 271; on kingly behaviour, 264–5; on perfect wife, 280; on a wife sent to her father's house, 288; on necessity for sons, 301-2; story of pigeon,
306-7; story of Pandu and Kunti, 310; story of Sudarsana, 310-12; story of Savitrī, 313 Mahābhāsya, 40 Mahadevi,324
Maitrāyaṇīsamhitā, 51-2 Malli, 216–17
Manet, Edouard, 93 Mantras: and initiation of girls, 37, 38; with bathing, 83; wife's invocation of, 112, 153; in offering to sun, 150, 154; Vedic, 154, 269
Manu, 23, 24, 32, 36, 37, 63, 275, 322; on mantras for women, 38; on āśrama theory, 45; on household tasks, 50, 168, 169-70; on waking, 51; on cows, 67; on cleansing, 71, 72; on teeth, 79; on bathing, 84; on fire ritual, 103, 106, 132-3; on rights to sacrifice, 108, 109; on polygamy, 121; on varmas of husbands and wives, 125; on reasons for leaving home, 135, 138; on foods, 144-5; on ritual role of patni, 145; on marrying a girl with no brother, 147; on saluting elders, 156, 158, 159, 160; on personal services, 166; on behaviour toward teacher, 167; on timing of rituals, 177, 178; on guests, 183, 185, 187, 193, 194, 196, 199, 206, 207; on Vedic students, 205; on order of feeding, 209; on mealtimes, 210, 216, 222, 224, 226, 227; on types of dishes, 220; on foods, 144-5; on ritual role of patni, 145; on marrying a girl with no brother, 147; on saluting elders, 156, 158, 159, 160; on personal services, 166; on evening rituals, 235; on intercourse, 240, 241; on inherent nature of women, 248, 250, 252, 253, 254, 260, 264, 270; on good conduct, 261; on attitudes toward women, 261-2; on kingly behaviour, 265; on wife's possession of property, 277, 278; on wife's refusal to make love, 288; on celibates without sons, 302

Manushi, 2, 327
Index
manusyayajña. See Guests, paying ho
mage to
Maratha Rajas of Thanjavur, 13-25; family tree, 13, 15; wars of, 16; disputed successions, 16; as scholars, 17-18; polygamy of, 20; travels of, 135
Marathi language, 17; authors of, 17 Marici, 71
Märkandeya, 171; on the tilaka mark,
96
Märkandeyapurana, 58, 59; on sharing sacrifice, 110; on guests, 207; story of Hariścandra in, 307
Marriage: Tryambaka's introduction on, 30-1; age of, 35, 37, 254; Jaimini on, 43; for pleasure, 124–5; symbolic, of young girl, 252-3
Maskarin, 163 Mätṛdatta, 87, 144
McCrindle, J. W., 57
Mealtime, 210-33; wife's duty to serve at, 210–14; husband not to eat in wife's presence, 214-17; serving the meal, 217-21; wife's own meal, 221– 7; wife's offering to Jyestha, 227–9; post-prandial duties, 229–33 Medha tithi, 109–10, 145; on salutations, 159-60; on guests, 183; on eating with one's wife, 216; on svadharma, 263
Meditation: wife's assistance in, 50, 54;
before dawn, 52–4
Men: and the sacred thread, 34; ritual
rules for, 43; equivalent of tilaka for, 99; rules of dress for, 101. See also Husbands
Mendicants, female, 171, 172 Menski, W. F., 254
Menstruation, 8, 97, 224; of unmarried
girls, 35; and cleansing, 74, 286; and intercourse, 81, 285; use of unguent after, 97; dishes used by woman in, 220; impurity of, 250–1, 283; and time of marriage, 254; sign of purity, 254–6; religious duties of woman in, 283-8
Meulenbeld, G. J., 97
369
Midday rituals, 176–210; man's duties, 176-7; general remarks on, 177–8; worship of all gods, 180-3; paying homage to guests, 183-210
mīmāmsā, 3
Ministers of Maratha kings, as authors,
18--19 Mirăbăi, 324 Mitākṣarā, 297 Mitra, 150
Mughals, victories of, 14-15 Monasticism for women, 318
Money, wife's management of, 168,
169-70
Morinis, E. A., 137
Mother: identity of Tryambaka's, 32;
saluting, 156
Mudrārākṣasavyākhyā, 10, 11, 12 Mudritakumudacandraprakaraṇa, 271-2 Muslims: threat to Thanjavur, 4, 21; influence on art, 94-5; nose and toe ornaments of, 101
'Muted groups', 327-8 Mutilation, as punishment, 56 Myths, reality of, 326-7
naivedya ritual, food for, 181, 182 Nakedness: during bathing, 86-7, 88;
and the adolescent bride, 87 namaskāra, 157, 162
Names: used in salutation, 160-1; rules for, 160; when not to be used, 161 Nandana, 183-4, 209 Nandapaṇḍita, 126 Nārāyaṇa, 144, 152 Nayaks, 16, 17
Nepal, 222; female ascetics in, 318 New Catalogus Catalogorum, 10 niyoga, 300-2, 310, 324
Nose: cutting off of, 55-6; deformed,
57; rings for, 101
Nrsimha, 317
Obedience of wife, vs. service, 312-13 O'Flaherty, W. D., 265

370
Oghavati, 310, 324
Old and sick, feeding of, 208–9
Index
Olivelle, P., 44; on renunciation for
women, 318
Political background, 13-16 Polygamy: at court, 20, 215; conditions
for, 121-2; and the fire sacrifice, 122; prevalence of, 166
Ornaments: wearing of, 100; during Postel-Coster, E., 326
intercourse, 242
Outcast (candala), touching, 34
Pracetas, 77
Prajapati, and the fire sacrifice, 103
Paithīnasī, 135, 218
Pratapsingh, 15, 16
pratyabhivada, 157
pratyutthāna, 157
Paintings, degrees of nakedness in, 92-3 Pregnant women: bathing, 85; feeding
pañcagavya, 60
Päṇḍu, 310
Pănini, 110, 123, 213; on salutations,
159
parapuruşa (any man not related to
wife): speaking to, 170-6; placing a blade of grass between, 172; ex- ample of Sită, 172-3; example of Draupadi, 173-4; physical contact with, 175-6
Paräs aramadhaviya, 3, 223, 235 Parāśara, 207, 220
Parents-in-law: saluting, 157, 161-2;
duties performed for, 163-4 Parry, J. P., 224
Părvati, 29, 30, 31, 124; as ideal wife, 317, 320; on husband as god, 323 Patanjali, 40, 159
patiśusrüṣaṇam of women, 258–9 pativratā (devoted wife), 1, 304; quota-
tions in praise of, 280–3 patnī, 30, 110; where to walk, 115–21;
entrance of at ritual, 117-18; in polygamy, 123; and sudra wife, 126; not to leave the fire, 135-6; crema- tion with sacred fire, 141; as ritual agent of sacrifice, 141-9; manage- ment of money by, 170; and homage to guests, 199; and left-overs, 224, 225; and evening ritual, 234, 235; to join husband on funeral pyre, 298 Personal services, as religious duty of
wife, 163-8
Pigeon and bird-catcher, story of, 306 Pilgrimages; forbidden to householder,
134; forbidden to wife, 136-8; for- bidden to husband, 138
of, 208–9; special treatment of, 209; religious duties of, 288-91; cravings of, 289–90; entry into lying-in cham- ber, 290-1
Priest: at fire sacrifice, 130-1, 142; pay
of, 134
Property, of women, 42-3, 276-80 pundraka, 99
purānas: on religious ideals of post- Vedic era, 258–9; on inherent nature of women, 265
Purification (saucācāra): rules for, 33; rules for women, 39–40, 49; after menstruation, 286; by dying with husband, 295-6
Purity of women, arguments for, 252-4,
254 6
pūrvamīmāmsā school, on women's right
to sacrifice, 41-3, 110-13 putrikā daughter, 146-7, 301
Rådhā, 320
Rāghavānanda, 166, 184, 251, 260; on
women's property, 278 Raghavan, V.10, 11, 12, 17, 76 Raghunatha Pandita, 21 Räjakośanighantu, 11
Rāma, 3, 162; rituals shared with Sită,
110, 114
Rămacandra, 76, 260
Rāmāyaṇa, 10, 18, 96, 274; on tilaka,
93; on placing a blade of grass,
172: on role of wife with guests, 200, 207; on inherent nature of women, 249, 251, 262, 271 Rammohan Roy, 292

Rape, 255
Index
Rebirth, and the rewards of good con-
duct, 261
Religious law. See dharmasastra Renunciation, as option for women,
318. See also Asceticism
     Rgveda, 121
     Rgvedic school, 154
     Rice: offerings of, 223; times for pound-
     ing, 233
     Ritual bath, 82-8; washing of head, 84-5; place of, 85; water for, 86; nakedness during, 86-7; after men- struation, 286 Rudra, 154 Rudradatta, 114
     Śabara, 41, 43, 270; on wife's share in sacrifice, 110-12, 115; on polygamy, 123
     Sacred thread: while sipping, 75-6;
     wearing of, 89
     Sacrifice: women's rights to, 41-3, 107, 144, 277; wife's share in, 108-9, 111-14; by man without a wife, 114; food left over from, 224; and possession of property, 277. See also Fire ritual sadyovadhú, 37
     Saffron, uses of, 96, 97 Sagara, 153
     sahagamana (dying with one's husband),
     115; controversy over, 292; objec- tions to, 292-3; quotations in favour of, 293-5; rewards for the bad wife, 295-7; and the brahmin wife, 287–8 Šāhajī, 15-16; as scholar, 17 Šāhajrāja Puram, scholars of, 17 Sāhavilāsagītā, 11 Śähendravilāsa, 11
     Saiyǎjî, 15, 16
     Sakuntală, 31, 288 Salomon, R., 283
     Salt, condiments, etc., serving of, 217–18 Samavedic school, 154
     samdhya ritual, 105-7, 149; actions
     associated with, 150
     Samvärta, 253, 254
     sanătanadharma, 258, 259, 263 Sanchi, sculptures of, 94 Sandal, M. L., 113
     Śändili, 282, 319 Sändilya, 229, 236
     371
     Sankha: on women's dress, 91, 94-5;
     on speaking to other men, 171 Sanskrit: literature of Thanjavur in, 17-18; religious texts written by men, 327-8
     Sari, 91; styles of wearing, 92, 95; bodice
     with, 97 Sarvajñanarayana, 144; on guests, 184,
     209; on good conduct, 260 Sastri, 11
     Satatapa: on earth for cleansing, 72–3; on guests, 194; on serving food, 217 Satapathabrāhmaṇa, 30-2, 117, 215,
     226-7 sati, 1, 8
     Sati, 31-2; as gentle goddess, 320 Såvitri, story of, 313-14 Sāyaṇa, 108, 160, 188, 202; on mythical
     marriages of young girl, 253 Section I, 6, 29–43. See also Introduction
     by Tryambaka
     Section II, Daily duties, 6-7, 44-51 Section IIA. Before Dawn, 6-7, 40, 51-101; äśrama theory, 44-5; daily rituals of householder, 45-7; rituals for men and women compared, 47– 50; waking before dawn, 51-7; rea- sons for early rising, 51-3; medita- tion, 52-4; what may be seen, 54–7; household tasks during, 58–63; wor- ship of threshold, 63-4; worship of cows, 67-8; ablutions, etc., 69–101 Section IIB, Rituals at dawn, 7, 102-55; serving the sacred fire, 102-49; offer- ing to sun, 149–55. See also Fire sacrifice; Senior wife; Wife Section IIC, Daytime rituals, 7, 156-233;
     saluting one's elders, 156-68; house- hold tasks, 168–76; midday rituals, 176-210; at meals, 210-33
     Section IID, Rituals at evening, 234–45; evening duties, 234-6; going to bed,
     372
     Index
     236-45. See also Sexual intercourse Section III, Inherent nature of women, 7-8, 246-72. See also Inherent nature of women
     Section IV, Duties common to women, 273-304; general rulings on be- haviour, 273-4; things to be avoided, 274-6; women's property, 276–80; in praise of the pativrată, 280-3; religious duties of menstruating wo- men, 283-8; of the pregnant woman, 288-91; of the woman whose hus- band is away, 291; dying with one's
     • husband, 291-8; duties of the widow, 298-304
     Section V, Tryambaka's conclusion,
     305-17; service without regard to own life, 305–7; acceptance of hus- band's sale of wife, 307-8; obedience in conflict with other duties, 308; obedience involving doing wrong, 309-12; obedience vs. service, 312- 14; Tryambaka's summary, 314–16; concluding verses, 316-17; colo- phon, 317
     Sen, Chitrabhanu, 119
     Senior wife: precedence of, 124, 125, 126; sons of, 124; if at fault, 126–7; duties performed by, 165; manage- ment of money by, 170; and treat- ment of guests, 206; and Jyeṣṭhā, 228-9
     Serfoji, 15, 16; as scholar, 17-18 Serfoji II, 15, 16
     Servants, left-overs for, 224
     Service, of student to teacher and wife
     to husband, 322
     Sexual intercourse, 237-45; and kāma,
     54; place of, 238; preliminaries to, 239; bed for, 239-40; clothing for, 240, 244–5; rules for, 241-5; touch- ing, 242, 243; and menstruation, 286-7; propitious times for, 287-8; during pregnancy, 289; to produce a son (niyoga), 300 Sexuality, of women, 260, 320 Sights on waking: auspicious, 55; in-
     auspicious, 55–7
     Sinfulness: of women, 246-50; and
     transmigration, 247
     Sinha, 1.241
     Sipping ritual (acamana), 75-7; rules for, 50; water to be used for, 77; in offering to sun, 150; before eating, 223
     Sītā, 3, 305; rituals shared by Răma with, 110, 114; blade of grass placed by, 172, 175, 176, 187; treatment of a guest by, 200–1; an unusual woman 249,262,271
     Siva: and Parvati, 30, 31; forehead marks for followers of, 99; offerings to, 152, 179 Śivājī, 13-14
     Skandapurana, 137, 251 smärta fire ritual, 104 Smith, F.M., 25, 113 Smṛticandrikā, 3, 90; on leaving home,
     135; on ritual agency of patnī, 145; on salutations, 157, 159; on eating alone, 215; on leaves for dishes, 218; on evening rituals, 235; on menstrua- tion, 283-4
     Smṛtiratna, 234
     Smṛtimuktāphala, 99; on serving food,
     219, 223
     Smṛtyarthasāra, 84, 148; on salutations, 157, 158; on offerings to gods, 180; on eating with one's wife, 216; on post-prandial ritual, 229; on going to bed, 236
     Social reality: relation of texts to, 325-7; actual experience of women, 327-9 Soma, 252-3
     soma sacrifice, cost of, 134 Son: and ritual fire, 146, 148; 'appointed daughter' as, 146; widow's depen- dence on, 300; and practice of niyoga, 300–2; adopted, 302
     śrauta ritual (fire sacrifice), 102-49; cost of, 134; by male head of house- hold, 149; food offered in, 180. See also Fire sacrifice
     Śrī: and cows, 60–2, 63, 65; as example to women, 62-3; at creation, 228 Śrīdharasvāmin, 153

Index
373
Staal, F., 25, 119 Strabo, 56, 57 strīdharma 3, 8, 259, 260, 261; and inherent nature of women, 262; and conflict in nature of women, 263; Umå on, 281; woman's only hope, 321; right and wrong superseded by, 324
Stridharmapaddhati, 262; importance of, 304; mode of presentation, 4-5; overview of sections, 5-10; author- ship of, 10–13; date of, 12; political background, 13-16; intellectual mi- lieu, 16–23; reading of, 22; literary genre of, 23–5; conclusions of, 318– 29; bearing on the present, 325–9; and actual experience of women, 327-9. See also Sections by number strīsvabhāva (inherent nature of women),
8, 319
Sudarsana, story of, 310-12
šūdra, 34; and children, 36; and women,
38, 39, 73, 251-2; general rules for, 39; and right to sacrifice, 41; and fire sacrifice, 126; salutations by, 159
Suicide, 292-3 Sujătă, 214
Sun: ritual worship of, 104-5; offering
of respect to, 149–55; water offered, 150-2; powder circle, 151, 152
Sürya, and the fire sacrifice, 103, 105 susrüṣā, 29-30 śusrüṣaṇam, 29-30 Suśruta, 145
sutras, in dharmaśästra literature, 24, 25 Suttee, campaign against, 1, 292 suvāsinī, 209
svabhāva, 264, 265; vs. svadharma, 266 svadharma, 258, 259, 263, 320; of men, 263-4; nature of, 264; of women, 264
Taittiriyopaniṣad, 188, 205 Taittirīyabrāhmaṇa, 188 Tamil, 4; language of, 16
Teacher, religious: saluting, 156, 158; behaviour of student toward, 167;
service of student to, 312, 322 Teeth, cleaning of, 40, 78-82, 323; in daily schedule, 49; twigs for, 78;
times for, 79; aspects of, 80-1; as pleasure, 80; after meals, 229 Thieme, P., 87-8
Telugu, 16
Thanjavur, 3, 13-14; dynasty of, 15 Threshold, worship of, 63–4
tilaka mark: wearing of, 96-100; shape
of, 97; significance of, 99-100 Toes, rings for, 101 Trikandamandana, 113, 134; on pil- grimages, 136-7; on resetting fire, 141
Transmigration, and gender, 247 Tryambaka: aims of, 3-4; authorship by, 10–13, 19; authority of texts cited by, 325-7; significance of, 329. See also Sections by number; Stri- dharmapaddhati
Tryambakarāyamakhin, 10, 11, 13, 18,
317
Tryambakayajvan, 3, 10, 12, 13 Tukkoji, 15, 16; as scholar, 17-18 Tuptikā, 112
Twigs, for teeth-cleaning, 78, 229
ucchista. See Left-overs
uha (rules of modification): and gram-
mar, 40-1, 42; ignored, 43 Ujjvalā, 143, 208 Umă, 281-2
upasamgrahana, 157-8
Urination: and purification, 33-4, 39;
in daily schedule, 49; ritual sig nificance of, 69; place of, 69-70; prohibited places, 70-1; cleansing after, 71-4
Ušanas, 89, 90, 215, 298 Uttanka, 211-12, 324
Vägbhata, 290
vaiśvadeva ritual: food for, 181; presence of wife at, 182; food prepared by wife, 198–9; in the evening, 324–35

374
Index
Van Buitenen, J.A.B., 172-3, 202, 313 Vanita, R., 58
Varǎhamihira, 267
varna: of men and women, 39, 76–7; of junior wives, 125; of first wives, 125; and the fire sacrifice, 125-6; and svadharma, 263; and dying with one's husband, 297 Varuna, 105, 150 Vasistha, 99, 146, 221 Vätsyǎyana, 243, 244
Veda: source of dharma, 24; and study
of grammar, 40-1; study of by women, 112, 139; mantras of, 154; status of, 269
Vedic students: rules for, 80-1, 143; and bathing, 83; clothing of, 89-90; foods for, 144; hospitality for, 203–4, 206; threats to wife from, 204-5; left-overs for, 224; relations with guru, 322
Vedic study, forbidden to women, 139,
168, 177, 251, 321 Vessantara, Prince, 307-8 Vidyarṇava, 74, 106, 151, 153; on man-
tras, 154; on midday duties, 177-8; on serving food, 218; on post- prandial duties, 231 Vijñānesvara, 162, 214, 309 Vikarṇa, 265
Visnu: worship of by women, 53; fore-
head marks for follower of, 99; offerings to, 179; creation of uni- verse by, 228
Visnupurāṇa, 153, 199, 207; on evening
rituals, 235; story of women's bles- sedness in, 256-8
Viśvāmitra, 39 Viśvarůpa, 253 Vora, J. H., 11
Vyasa: on cleansing, 73; on tilaka mark,
96; on householder's substitutes, 147; on sun ritual, 151; on household tasks, 168; on image worship, 178; on offerings of food, 180, 181; on guests, 206-7; on husband's left- overs, 222, 225; on wife's eating, 226; on going to bed, 237; on inter-
course, 241; on women as blessed, 256-8
Waking before dawn: male vs. female, 50; rulings related to, 51. See also Section IIA, Dawn
Washing, of pots and pans, 233 Water: in sandhyā ritual, 150; offered to a guest, 151; for image worship, 179; before eating, 223. See also Sipping
Wickedness of women, debate on: ra-
tionalistic approach, 267; Varaha- mihira on, 267-8; Yudhisthira on, 268; apologetic approach, 268–9; support for theory, 271-2. See also Inherent nature of women Widows: clothing of, 89, 91, 97; and the tilaka mark, 98; wearing of ornaments, 100; and the sacred fire, 141; religious duties of, 298-304; conduct of, 298-300; remarriage of, 300; practice of niyoga, 300-2; im- purity of, 303; shaving heads of, 303-4
Wife: duties of, 1, 29-30, 52; traditional
role of, 3; terms for service of, 29–30; as bearer of sons, 31, 63, 109, 121; delegation of duties by, 64–5; and the fire ritual, 104–5, 107, 115; in other sacrifices, 111-14; early eq- uality with husband, 113; precedence of, 124-6; absence from fire ritual, 133, 136, 139; relationship with sacred fire, 140-1; as ritual agent of sacrifice, 141-9: and offering to sun, 154-5; husband saluted by, 156, 162-3; personal service to husband, 167; forbidden to speak to other men, 170-6; duties in image worship, 178-9, 180; role toward guests, 185, 198; duty to serve at meals, 210-21; own meal of, 221–7; post-prandial duties, 229-33, virtues of contrasted with sins of women, 262, 272; pro- perty of, 276-80; primary duty of, 305, 321; husband worshipped by.

Index
375
322-4. See also Junior wife; patnī;
Senior wife
Wilson, H. H., 32
Wiser, C. V., 328
Wiser, W. H., 328
Women: ideal of, 2, 4; daily practices
of, 6-7; complexities of position, 8; of period of Maratha Rajas, 19; ritual duties of, 29-30, 47-9; as südra, 38; and the birth of brahmins, 38-9; and right to sacrifice, 41-2, 144; and right to property, 42-3; daily timetable of, 47-8, 52; duties for men and women compared, 49- 50; knowledge of omens, 57; in- stability of, 62; japa meditation for- bidden to, 150-1; and salutations, 159, 161; monastic or ascetic life
for, 318; evil nature of vs. model
of virtuous wife, 320. See also In- herent nature of women; Widows; Wife
Wujastyk, D., 204
Yajnavalkya, 24, 45; on initiation of girls, 37; on early waking, 52; on sipping, 75, 76, 77; on fire sacrifice, 125; on salutations, 161-2; on eating in sight of one's wife, 214, 227; on afternoon activities, 232; on niyoga, 301
Yajñeśa, 10, 12, 317 Yajurveda, 288
Yama, 36, 217; and Naciketas, 186-7 Yaśaścandra, 271 Yatidharmaprakāśa, 318 Yudhisthira, 60-1, 271, 310
