+++
title = "06 The Baudhāyana Dharmasūtra"
short_title = "06 The Baudhāyana"

+++
06 The Baudhāyana Dharmasūtra


This has been edited several times (text by Dr. Hultzsch at Leipzig in 1884, text in the Ānandāśrama collection of smṛtis and in the Mysore Government Oriental Series in 1907 with the commentary of Govindasvāmin; translated in S. B. E., Vol. 14, with an Introduction). The Mysore edition has been used in this work. Baudhāyana is a teacher of the Kṛṣṇayajurveda. A complete set of the Baudhāyanasūtras has not yet been recovered and has not been as carefully preserved as the sūtras of Āpastamba and Hiraṇyakeśin. Dr. Burnell arranges Baudhāyana's sūtras into six sūtras, the Śrautasūtra in 19 praśnas (probably); Karmāntasūtra in 20 adhyāyas; Dvaidhasūtra in four praśnas; Gṛhyasūtra in four praśnas; Dharmasūtra in four praśnas; Śulvasūtra in three adhyāyas. The commentators offer no indication as to the place originally assigned to the _gṛhya_, _dharma_ and _śulva_ _sūtras_ in the whole collection. Dr. Caland in his mono graph (A.D. 1903) 'Uber das Rituelle sūtra des Baudhayana' gives on p. 12 the contents of the Baudhāyanasūtra as follow: Praśnas I-XXI Śrauta, XXII-XXV Dvaidha, XXVI XVIII Karmānta; XXIX-XXXI Prāyaścitta; XXXII Śulvasūtra; XXXIII-XXXV Gṛhyasūtra, XXXVI Gṛhyaprāyaścitta ; XXXVII Gṛhyaparibhāsā; XXXVIII-XLI Gṛhyapariśiṣṭa; XLII-XLIV Pitṛmedha; XLV Pravara; XLVI-XLIX Dharma. Dr. Caland edited nine _praśnas_ of the Śrautasūtra for the B. I. Series (A. D. 1904). Dr. R. Shamsastri published for the Mysore University (in 1920) the Baudhāyanagṛhyasūtra with _paribhāṣā_, gṛhyaśesa, Pitṛmedhasūtra. The Gṛhyasūtra cites the view of Baudhāyana himself (1.7). The Baudhāyana-dharma refers to the Gṛhya and presuppose it in several places (vide note 54). In the Baudhāyanagṛhya (III. 9. 6) we have a reference to _padakāra_ Ātreya, Vṛttikāra Kauṇḍinya, Pravacanakāra Kāṇva Bodhāyana, and Sūtrakāra Āpastamba.[^68c] A similar passsage occurs in the Bhāradvāja Gṛhyasūtra. In the Baudhāyana-dharma-sūtra (II. 5.27 Ṛṣitarpaṇa) we have Kāṇva Bodhāyana, Āpastamba sūtrakāra and Satyāṣādha Hiraṇyakesin one after another. These references show that Kāṇva Bodhāyana was an ancient sage when the Baudhāyana-dharmasūtra was written and that he could not have been the author of the gṛhya or the dharmasūtras of Baudhāyana. Baudhāyana may have been a descendant of this Kāṇva Bodhāyana. This surmise is supported by Govindasvāmin who explains Baudhāyana occurring in Baudhāyanadharinasūtra 1. 3. 13 as Kāṇvāyana. In the dharmasūtra Baudhāyana is himself cited as an authority several times (e.g. I. 4. 15 and 24, III. 5. 8, III. 6. 20). In all these places the Mysore edition reads Bodhāyana, while the Ānandāśrama reads Baudhāyana. In one or two places he is styled 'bhagavān (III. 6. 20). Several explanations are offered by the commentator Govindasvāmin (on I. 3. 13). He says that it is the practice of the Ācāryas to refer to themselves in the third person (as Medhātithi says on Manu. [^69]) or that the author of the dharmasūtra is a pupil of Baudhāyana as the Manusmṛti is promulgated by Bhṛgu, the pupil of Manu, or there was some other Baudhāyana whose works have not come down to us. 

[^68c]:
    अथ दक्षिणतः प्राचीनावीतिनो वैशम्पायनाय फलिङ्गवे तित्तिरये उखायोख्यायात्रये आत्रेयाय पदकाराय कौण्डिन्याय वृत्तिकाराय कण्वाय बोधायनाय प्रवचनकारायापस्तम्बाय सूत्रकाराय सत्याषाढाय हिरण्यकेशाय वाजसनेयाय याज्ञवल्क्याय भरद्वाजायाग्निवेश्यायाचार्येभ्य ऊर्ध्वरेतोभ्यो वानप्रस्थेभ्यो वंशस्थेभ्य एकपत्नीभ्यः कल्पयामीति. The epithets must be understood as arranged above, since elsewhere the epithet सूत्रकार is specially appropriated to आपस्तम्ब. The हिरण्यकेशिगृह्य​ (II. 20. 1, ed. by Kirste in 1889) makes this clear, It reads 'आत्रेयाय पदकाराय कौण्डिन्याय वृत्तिकाराय सूत्रकारेभ्यः सत्याषाढाय प्रवचनकर्तृभ्यः आचार्येभ्यः' etc. भारद्वाजगृह्य (quoted by Dr. Caland in — Uber das Rituelle &c. 3. n. 2) reads 'बौधायनाय भरद्वाजाय सूत्रकारायापस्तम्बं सर्वेभ्यः सूत्रकारेभ्यः &c.' ओं कण्वं बौधायनं तर्पयामि, ओमापस्तम्बं सूत्रकारं तर्पयामि ओं सत्याषाढं हिरण्यकेशिनं तर्पयामि, ओं वाजसनेयिनं याज्ञवल्क्यं तर्पयामि, ओमाश्वलायनं शौनकं तर्पयामि, ओं व्यासं तर्पयामि ।' No 164-169 in बौ. ध. सू. II. 5 (Ānan. ed.). The हिरण्यकेशिगृह्य​ (edited by Kirste) does not mention बौधायन​ at all in the तर्पण​ (II. 20-21), but mentions आत्रेयायपदकार, कौण्डिन्य वृत्तिकार, सत्याषाढ and सूत्रकारs.

Confusion results from the lists of sages in _tarpaṇa_ mentioned in several Gṛhyasūtras. The passage from Baudhāyana gṛ is quoted in note[^68c]. In that passage Kāṇva Bodhāyana is called 'pravacanakāra' and Āpastamba is called 'sūtrakāra', while Satyāsādha, Hiraṇyakeśa, Vājasaneya, Yājñavalkya, Bharadvāja and Āgniveśya are merely named without any addition, In the Baud. Dh. S. quoted in the same note Kāṇva Baudhāyana (without the epithet 'pravacanakāra'), Āpastamba sūtrakāra and Satyāsādha Hiraṇyakeśin are named. Two questions arise about the three names viz. (1) are the sages mentioned in the tarpaṇa passages the authors of the sūtra works in which they occur; (2) what is the import of the words pravacanakāra and sūtrakāra applied to Kāṇva Bodhāyana and Āpastamba respe ctively and do those words suggest that Kāṇva Bodhāyana is much earlier than Āpastamba. The present writer thinks that the authors of the Gṛhyasūtras were different from Kāṇva Bodhāyana and Āpastamba to whom water is directed to be offered in the _tarpaṇa_ part of those works. They might be descendants of Kāṇva Bodhāyana and Āpastamba who are included in the sages for _tarpaṇa_.

If Kāṇva Bodhāyana and Āpastamba mentioned in the tarpaṇa passage were also the authors of the Bodhāyana and Āpastamba gṛhyasūtras it is very difficult to believe that they recommended to the generations that would come after them to offer water to them in tarpaṇa. The word pravacana[^69a] occurs frequently in the Upaniṣads viz. Tai. Up. 9, Kaṭha II. 23 and Muṇḍaka III. 2.4 (nāyam-ātmā pravacanena labhyaḥ). The Tai. Up. (I. 9), after setting out the opinions of two sages, mentions the view of Nāka Maudgalya that svādhyāya (study of the Veda) and pravacana (expounding or exposition i.e. teaching) is _tapas_ (i.e. they should be striven for). The Ṛgveda I. 162. 1 employs the form 'pravakṣyāmaḥ' (we shall loudly proclaim in the sacrifices the valorous deeds of the swift horse born among Gods). The Āp. Gṛ. while dilating upon the offering of Madhuparka once a year to one's teacher, father-in-law, king &c. when they pay a visit, provides that one should offer only once and not every year Madhuparka to a famous expounder (of the Veda and its meaning) acc. to Haradatta (on Āp. Gṛ. V. 13. 20. (sakritpravaktre citrāya). In these words (pravacanakāra and sūtrakāra) there is no suggestion of time or early or late in time. The only difference is that the expounder may compose his work in any way (which may be prolix or otherwise), but a sūtrakāra has to be brief and compose his work in an appropriate style. 

[^69]: 'प्रायेण ग्रन्थाकाराः स्वमतं परापदेएशे नुब्रवते' (on Manu I. 4). 

[^69a]:
    ऋतं च स्वाध्यायप्रवचनेच ।...सत्यमिति सत्यवचा राथीतरः । तप इति तपोनित्यः पौरुशिष्टिः। स्वाध्यायप्रवचने एवेति नाको मौद्‌गल्यः।तद्धि तपस्तद्धि तपः। तै. उ. प​. I. 9; शङ्कराचार्य explains: 'स्वाध्यायोध्ययनम्‌ । प्रवचनमध्यापनं ब्रह्मयज्ञो वा' नायमात्मा प्रवचनेन लभ्यो न मेधया न बहुना श्रुतेन। कठ 2. 23 and मुण्डक​ III. 2. 3. Compare: द्विजातीनामध्ययनमिज्या दानम् , ब्राह्मणस्याधिकाः प्रवचनयाजनप्रतिग्र​हा: गौ. ध​. सू. X. 1-2; हरदत्त​ says 'प्रवचनमध्यापनम्'. It is clear from आप​. ध​. सू. I. 11. 32. 1 'प्रवचनयुक्तो वर्षाशरदं मैथुनं वर्जयेत्' that प्रवचन means अध्यापन​ in that sūtra also. The word प्रवचन is derived from वच् to speak with प्र and literally means 'declare loudly proclaim,' Nāka Maudgalya sage occurs in Bṛ. Up. VI. 4.4.

The following are the contents of the Baudhāyana-dharmasūtra :- _Praśna_ I :- Sources of _dharma_, who are _śiṣṭas_, _pariṣad_, different practices of northern and southern India, countries where śiṣṭas reside and where mixed castes reside, prāyaścitta for visiting countries of the latter type; 2 Studenthood for 48, 24 or 12 years, time of _upanayana_ and the girdle, skin, staff appropriate to each caste, duties of _brahmacārin_, eulogy of _brahmacarya_; 3. The duties of the _snātaka_ who has completed his studies and observances but has not yet married; 4. Directions about carrying the earthen jar (in the case of the _snātaka_); 5. Bodily and mental śauca, purification of various substances, impurity on birth and death, meaning of _sapiṇḍa_ and _sakulya_, rules of inheritance, purification on touching a corpse or a woman in her menses or on dog-bite, what flesh and food was allowed and forbidden; 6. Purification from the point of view of sacrifice, purification of clothes, ground, grass, fuel, vessels, and articles used in sacrifice; 7. Rules about the importance from the sacrificial point of view of sacrifice, of the sacrificial utensils, priests, the sacrificer and his wife, ghee, cooked offerings, the victim, _soma_ and fires; 8. The four _varṇas_ and the sub-castes; 9. Mixed castes; 10. The duties of kings, the five great sins and punishments for them, punishments for killing birds; witnesses; 11. The eight forms of marriage, holidays; _Praśna_ II. 1 Prāyaścittas for _brahmahatyā_ and other great sins, Prāyaścittas for a _bramachārin_ violating his vow of celibacy, for marrying a _sagotra_ girl, for marrying before elder brother, sins lesser than the great ones, description of such penances as Parāka, Kṛcchra, Atikṛcchra; 2. Partition of heritage, larger share for the eldest, the several substitutes for an _aurusa_ son, exclusion from inheritance, dependence of women, prāyaścitta for adultery by men and women, rules about _niyoga_, means of subsistence in distress, continuous duties of the house-holder such as Agnihotra &c.; 3. The daily duties of the householder such as bathing, ācamana, Vaiśvadeva, giving food; 4. _Sandhyā_; 5. Rules about the manner of bathing, of Ācamana, worship of the sun, and about the method of propitiating ('_tarpaṇa_') gods, sages and pitṛs; 6. The five great daily _yajñas_; the four castes and their duties; 7. Regulations about dinner; 8. Śrāddha; 9. Eulogy of sons and spiritual benefit from sons; 10. Rules about _sannyāsa_; _Praśna_ III. 1 Modes of subsistence for the two kinds of householders, Sālīna and Yāyāvara; 2. The means of subsistence called 'Ṣaṇnivartanī'; 3. The duties of the forest hermit and his means of livelihood; 4. Prāyaścitta for not observing the vows of _brahmacārin_ or householder; 5. Method of reciting _Aghamarṣaṇa_, the holiest of texts; 6. The ritual of _prasṛtayāvaka_; 7. The purificatory _homa_ called Kūṣmāṇḍa; 8. The penance called _cāndrāyaṇa_; 9. The recital of the Vedas without taking food; 10. Theories about purification for sin, purifying things; _Praśna_ IV. 1. Prāyaścittas of various kinds viz. for eating forbidden food or drink &c.; 2. _Prāṇāyāmas_ and _Aghamarṣaṇa_ as purifiers in case of several sins; 3. Secret prāyaścittas; 4. Various Vedic texts as prāyaścittas; 5. Means of securing _siddhi_ by means of _japa_, _homa_, _iṣṭi_ and _yantra_: the penances called Kṛcchra, Ati-Kṛcchra, Sāntapana, Parāka, Cāndrāyaṇa; 6. The muttering (japa) of holy texts, the iṣṭis; 7. Praise of _Yantras_, various Vedic texts used in _homa_; 8. Censure of those who enter on the means of _siddhi_ out of great greed, permission to get these things done through another in certain circumstances.

The extant Dharmasūtra does not appear to have come down intact. The fourth _praśna_ is most probably an interpolation. Most of the eight chapters of that _praśna_ are full of verses, the portion in prose being very small. The last three chapters (6-8) are entirely in verse. The style is quite different from that of the first two _praśnas_. The first five chapters of the fourth _praśna_ dealing with prāyaścittas are more or less superfluous, the same subject having been dealt with in II. 1. and III. 4-10. Some of the sūtras in the earlier _praśnas_ are repeated verbatim in the fourth, e.g. II, I, 33-34 and IV. 2. 10-11 (avakīrṇi-prāyaścitta). The third _praśna_ also is not free from doubt. The tenth chapter of the third praśna is, as said above, taken from Gautama. The sixth chapter of the third _praśna_ agrees very closely in phraseology with the 48th chapter of the Viṣṇudharmasūtra. But it is rather difficult to say which is the borrower. Dr. Jolly (S. B. E. Vol. VII. p. XIX) is inclined to think that both borrowed from a common source. It seems more probable that Viṣṇu borrows from Baudhāyana, as the Viṣṇudharmasūtra uses the form 'punīta' in place of 'punatha' (in Baud.) and as the Viṣṇudharmasūtra omits all reference to Rudra (Baud. III. 6. 12.) and omits the words "gaṇān paśyati, gaṇādhipatim paśyati ... bhagavān Bodhāyanaḥ" (Baud. III. 6. 20.). In the Mysore edition all the four praśngs of the _Dharmasūtra_ are divided into _adhyāyas_, but the Mss used by Bühler appear to have divided the first two _praśnas_ into kaṇḍikās and the last two into adhyāyas. There are many repetitions even in the first two praśnas, which therefore make one rather doubtful about the authenticity of the first two praśnas also in their entirety. For example II. 6. 11 and 31 have identical; parts in II, 7 22 and II. 10.53 the same verse ("aṣṭau grāsā" &c.) is quoted. Such repetitions are frequent in the two last praśnas e.g. III. 2. 16 and III. 3. 23; III. 4. 5 and III.7. 12. Some of the quotations ascribed to Baudhāyana in the Mitāksarā and other works are not taken from the _dharmasūtra_, but from the Gṛhyasūtra or its supplements (e.g. the words 'ekāṃ śākhāmadhīte śrotriyaḥ" quoted in the Mit. on Yāj. III. 24 which are cited by Hultzsch (on p. 125), are taken from the Gṛhya (vide note 78 below). 

Though the fourth praśna appears to be interpolated, yet the interpolation must have taken place early enough. Viśvarūpa on Yāj. I. 64 quotes Baud. Dh. S. IV. 1. 15-16 (trīṇi varṣānyṛtumatī) expressly as Baudhayana's and on Yāj. I. 72 quotes Baud. Dh. S. IV. 1. 22 (bhartuḥ pratiniveśena &c.) by name. The Mit, on Yāj. III. 305 quotes (as Baudhāyana's) a long passage, Baudh. Dh. S. IV. 1. 5-11. Śaṅkarācārya on Bṛ. Up. IV. 5. 15 quotes Baud. II. 10. 2 "brahmacaryavān pravrati as smṛti. Yāj. I. 71 is almost the same as Baud. Dh. II. 2. 58 (Somaḥ śaucam &c)

The Dharmasūtra of Baudhāyana is somewhat loose in structure and is not concise. Govindasvāmin remarks (on I. 2. 19) that Baudhāyana does not aim at brevity.[^70] Several subjects are treated of in two places and often without any logical connection with what precedes or follows. Rules of inheritance (dāya-bhāga) occur in the midst of rules about prāyaścitta (in II. 2.); rules about holidays (anadhyāya) occur immediately after the eight forms of marriage and the condemnation of the sale of a daughter (I. 11). Rules about _snātaka_ occur in two places (1. 3 and II. 3. 10 ff.). Baudhāyana quotes at least 90 Verses introduced by the words "athāpyudāharanti", more than 80 being from the first two praśnas alone. There are over two hundred other verses, about 80 of which occur in the first two praśnas and about ten are Vedic. Some of the verses even in the first two praśnas do not appear to be quotations e.g. I. 1. 16, II. 2. 1, II. 3. 50, II. 3. 52-54 and 56. A verse quoted is in the Vaṃśastha metre (IV. 3. 14); there are two verses in the Upajāti metre taken as a quotation (II. 3. 18). There are some prose quotations introduced with the words "athāpyudāharanti" (e.g. II. 4. 5 and II. 6. 30 which refers to the _asura_ Kapila son of Prahlāda). The language of the Baud. Dh. S. is archaic and often departs from the Pāṇinean standard. Baudhāyana employs such un-Pāninean forms as "gṛhya" (for gṛhītyā in II. 5. 1), pūjya (II. 9. 5.), "adhigacchānaḥ" (in II. 9.9.), ānayitvā (III. 3. 6), "punatha" (in III. 6. 5, probably a quotation), "tebhiḥ" (for taiḥ in III. 2. 16, a quotation). In several places Baudhāyana states opposite views and then gives his own opinion on the point, e.g. Baud. I. 5. 105-109 (about impurity on birth); II. 1. 49-51.


[^70]: ननु द्विजातिषु स्वकर्मस्थेषु इति सूत्रयितव्ये किमिाते सूत्रद्वयारम्भः । सत्यं अयं ह्याचार्यो नातीव ग्रन्थलाधवाभिप्रायो भवति । 

As regards the literature known to Baudhāyana the following points may be noted. All the four Vedas are mentioned by name in II. 5. 27 (_tarpaṇa_). He quotes very frequently the Taittirīya Saṃhitā, Tai. Brāhmaṇa and the Tai. Āraṇyaka (in the Āndhra recension). Well-known hymns of the Ṛgveda such as the Aghamarṣaṇa, the Puruṣasūkta and also simple '_ṛks_' are frequently referred to. In III. 10 (which is almost the same as Gautama 19) there is a sūtra enumerating the Upaniṣads, the Saṃhitas of all the Vedas and several _sāmans_ as purificatory texts. There are long quotations taken from the Śatapathabrāhmaṇa (XI. 3. 3.1 ff and XI. 5. 6.3) in Baud. (1. 2. 52 about brahmacāri and II. 6. 7-9 about _brahmayajña_). It is noteworthy that in the _tarpaṇa_ there is an invocation of the Atharvaveda and immediately afterwards of the Atharvāṇgirasaḥ. The same is found in the Baudhāyanagṛhya also (III. 2. 9 and 22). In the Upaniṣads (Bṛhadāraṇyaka II. 4. 10, IV. 1. 2) it is the word Atharvāngirasaḥ that stands for the Atharvaveda. Baudhāyana quotes a gāthā of the Bhāllavins (I. 1. 29) about the geographical limits of Āryāvarta. Vasiṣṭha adduces the same verse (I. 15) and says that it is taken from the Nidāna work of the Bhāllavins. The Nirukta also mentions a school of Vedic interpretation called Naidānāḥ. It is difficult to say what Nidāna works contained. _Itihāsa_ and Purāṇa occur in the _tarpaṇa_ (II. 5. 27). The _aṅgas_ of the Vedas occur in I. 1. 8 and the six _aṅgas_ in II. 8. 2. Whether the word "rahasya" in II. 8. 3 means the Āraṇyakas (as Govindasvāmin explains) is doubtful. Baudhāyana mentions a Vaikhānasa-śāstra in II. 6. 16, which appears to refer to the work of Vikhanas on hermits and speaks of Srāmaṇaka (the rites prescribed by Vikhanas for initiation as hermit), just as Gautama does. Among the authors on _dharma_ mentioned by name are: Aupajaṅghani (II. 2. 33 for the view that only _aurasa_ son was to be recognised and not the other kinds of sons[^71]), Kātya (1.2. 47), Kaśyapa (or Kāśyapa in other editions, I. 11. 20 on the point that a woman bought cannot be a _patnī_), Gautama (I. 1. 23 and II. 2. 70), Prajāpati (II, 4. 15 about failure in Sandhyopāsana, and II. 10. 71 about _sannyāsa_), Manu (IV. 1. 14 and IV. 2. 16), Maudgalya (II. 2. 61, about observances of a widow being restricted only to six months after her husband's death), Hārita (II. 1. 50). Baud. I. 2. 7 quotes a verse, which Vasiṣṭha ascribes to Hārīta (Vas. II. 6). As to Gautama, _vide_ p. 33 above. Manu is only mentioned in the fourth praśna, the authenticity of which, as said above, is very doubtful. Baudhāyana II. 2. 16 (about the efficacy of _Aghamarṣaṇa_) closely agrees with Manu XI. 260. The first reference to Manu's teaching cannot be traced in the Manusmṛti. Prajāpati (in III. 9. 21) seems to stand for god Brahmā and not for any real or mythical writer on _dharma_. One remarkable piece of information contained in Baudhāyana (II. 6. 30) is that he quotes from a work (of the Brāhmaṇa class in language) a prose passage wherein the division into four aśramas is ascribed to an _asura_ Kapila, son of Pralhāda. In II. 2.79 Baudhāyana quotes a _gāthā_ from the dialogue between the daughter of Uśanas and the king Vṛṣaparvan, which is nearly the same as Mahābhārata I. 78. 10 and 34. Baud. quotes the view of _Ācāryas_ (II. 6. 29 ) as Gautama does. In several places he refers to the views of his predecessors on _dharma_ as "others" (_eke_, _apare_ ) e.g. I. 4. 23, I 1. 5. 16, I. 6. 105-106, II. 5. 2. In II, 3. 18 two verses in the Upajāti metre are quoted as sung by "_anna_" (food). From the numerous quotations in verse cited by Baudhāyana on topics of _dharma_, it follows that the Dharmasūtra was preceded by a considerable number of works on _dharma_ in verse. Bühler (SBE vol. XIV, p. XLIII) says that Vijñāneśvara was the first writer who quoted the Baud. D. S. But there are writers who flourished centuries before Vijñāneśvara that regarded Baudhāyana as a writer on _dharma_ and either quoted his words or pointedly referred to them. Śabara in his _bhāṣya_ on Jaimini I. 3. 3 says that the rule in the Smṛtis about the period of Vedic study being 48 years is opposed to the Vedic injunction "one who has begot sons and whose hair are dark should consecrate the sacrificial fires[^73]." This must be regarded as referring to the words of Baudhāyana (I. 2. 1). Śabara uses the same word "Vedabrahmacarya" that Baud. employs. It is true that Gautama and Āpastamba both refer to the rule about 48 years, but they do not employ the word "_veda-brahmacarya_." The Tantravārtika[^74] of Kumārila says that the words of Āpastamba (II. 6. 15. 1) which seem to accept the validity of local and family usages (even though opposed to Smṛti tradition) stand refuted by the words of Baudhāyana (I. 1. 19-24) who cites only such censured usages as are opposed to Sṃrti. Kumārila appears to think that Baudhāyana attacks the extant work of Āpastamba, i.e, the present Baud. is later than the present Āpastamba. It is not necessary to follow Kumārila implicitly as regards chronological details, where he is speaking of writers that flourished over a thousand years before him. But his opinion deserves weight. The Tantravārtika quotes a Smṛti passage which bears a close resemblance to Baudhāyana (II. 3. 28)[^75]. In the commentary of Viśvarūpa (who as we shall see below flourished about 800 A. D.) on Yājñavalkya, Baudhāyana is quoted at least nine times in the chapter on _ācāra_ alone. Vide Viśvarūpa on Yāj. I. 21, 26, 29, 53, 64, 69, 72, 79, 195 (Trivandrum edition), where Baud. I. 5. 14, I. 2. 30, I. 5. 5, I. 1. 17, IV. 1. 15, IV. 1. 18, IV. 1. 22, IV. 1. 20 and I. 5. 47 are respectively quoted. There are very few variations from the present text and the only serious variation is as regards the last (I. 5. 47) which is in prose (while Viśvarūpa quotes a verse). It is remarkable that Viśvarūpa quotes several verses from the fourth _praśna_, which shows that even if the fourth praśna be an interpolation, it is comparatively an ancient one. The Mit. also (on Yāj. III. 306) quotes a long passage from the fourth praśna (IV. 1. 5-11). The words of the Śākuntala[^76] that the first precept is that a girl is to be given away to a meritorious person are probably a reminiscence of Baud. IV. 1. 12. Medhātithi on Manu. V. 117 quotes Baudhāyana I. 5. 47 and on IV. 36 quotes Baud. I. 4. 2 (which is mutilated as printed). On Manu. V. 114 he says that all the rules about purification of substances are contained in Baudhāyana-smṛti. On Manu. V. 118, he quotes Baud. I. 5. 50.

[^71]: One of the verses (अप्रमत्ता रक्षत तन्तुमेनं) is referred to by शबरस्वामी on पू. मी. सू 1. 2. 13 (अपराधात् कर्तुश्च पुत्रदर्शनम्).


[^72]: स्तुवतो दुहिता त्वं वै याचतः प्रतिगृह्णतः । अथाहं स्तूयमानस्य ददतोऽप्रतिगृह्णतः ॥

[^73]: 
    शबर​'s words are 'अष्टाचत्वारिंशद्वर्षाणि वेदब्रह्मचर्यचरणं जातपुत्रः कृष्णकेशोऽग्नीनादधीत इत्यनेन विरुद्धम् ॥' on 1. 3. 3, and again on 1. 3. 4 'अपुंस्त्वं प्रच्छादयन्तश्चाष्टाचत्वारिंशद्वर्षाणि वेदब्रह्मचर्य चरितवन्तः'. बौधायन​'s words 'अष्टाचत्वारिंशद्वर्षाणि पौराणं वेदब्रह्मचर्यम्'. Compare गौ. ध. सू. 2. 52 and आ. ध​. सू. I. 1. 2. 12.

[^74]:
    तन्त्रवार्तिक p. 139 'आपस्तम्बवचनं तु बौधायनेन स्मृतिविरुद्धदुष्टाचारोदाहरणान्येव प्रयच्छता निराकृतम्'. The words in the बौ. ध​. सू. (I. 11. 27 'तत्र तत्र देशप्रामाण्यमेव स्यात्' are opposed to the words of आपस्तम्ब​ 'एतेम देशलधर्मा व्याख्याताः.'

<!-- Page 56 Para 2 -->
POONA 

FOUNDED 

6, 

The Baulhāyana Dharmasūtra 



About the home of Baudhāyana it is difficult to advance any positive conclusion. In modern times Baudhāyaniyas are mostly confined to the south. We know that Sāyana, the great commentator of the Vedas, was a Baudhāyaniya. A grant of Nandivarma, a Pallava, of the 9th century mentions Brāhmaṇas of the pravacina-sūtra as recipients.77 As Baudhāyana is called pravacanakāra in the Gṛhyasūtra Bühler thinks (8. B. E. vol. 14 p. XLII) that the Brāhmaṇas belonged to the Baudhāyanacarana. Bühler is probably right. In the grant most of the donees are students of the Āpastamba Sūtra. First the Gotra, then the Sūtra and then the name of the donee are introduced in the grant. Therefore as some of the donees are said to be students of "pravacanasūtra," it follows that "pravacana" stands for some sūtra school. It appears that sūtra and pravucunui are two different 

75 grzaniaat . 993 77891 a fia: 1 ...anda sā jag a fold. 

Tarife Arriā '; Baud. has a una cosa Fogadt 9. Compare ha 

IV.36. It is probable that the gozairat, combines al. and Ag. 76 'quad 777 gaisa ar974: Feq:'371372s 4th Act ; while Battle 

bas 'ceramaa front af** Pengistut'. 77 1. A. vol. 8, pp 273-274. 

AU 

NS 

FOONA 

W 

FOUNDED 

History of Dharmasūstra 

things, whatever the latter term may mean. Baudhāyana is called pravacanakāra and Āpastamba is styled sūtrakāra. We are toid by the Baudhāyana-gṛhysūtra78 that a Brāhmaṇa who studied sūtra and pravacana was styled "bhrūna." Bühler was inclined to hold that Baudhāyana was a southern teacher for several reasons. Baudhāyana mentions customs of the south and includes see-faring as a custom peculiar to the north (I. 1. 20 ), while in another place he places sea-faring at the head of sins (patanīyas ) lesser than the mortal ones (II. 1. 41 ). Therefore it is said that he was not a northern teacher. But as against this we have to remember that Baudhāyana (I. 1.29) quotes with approval a verse in which the countries of Avanti (Ujjain), Anga, Magadha, Surāstra ( Kathiawar) and Dakṣiṇāpatha are declared to be the home of mixed castes. Dakṣiṇāpatha was generally supposed to be the whole peninsula south of the Narmadā. Baudhāyana, if he was a native of the south, would not have spoken of his country as the home of mixed castes only, unless he put a restricted meaning on the word Daksiṇāpatha ( which sometimes meant in later days Mahārāstra). Vide J. B. B. R. A. S. for 1917 p. 620. Though as stated above, the question of the home of Baudhāyana is a difficult one, yet if a definite inclination has to be shown, then I am disposed to agree with Bühler that the author of Baud. Dh. 8. was a southerner. It is important to note that Baud. wants to expound the dharmas declared in the Veda, in the Smṛtis and those practised by śistas (I. 1.1-4) and defines sistas (1. 1.5-6) as those who possess certain moral qualities and who understand the Veda together with other supporting sastras. He sets out first the five peculiar usages of the southern part, two of which are the usages of marrying one's maternal uncle's or paternal aunt's daughter, These two are even now in vogue in some parts of Mahārāstra and the South among certain sub-divisions of brāhmaṇas and were not prevalent in the north. Baudhāyana impartially sets forth five practices of the south and five of the north that were opposed to ancient śāstras and his own view appears to have been that in the case of all persons belonging to Aryāvarta ( whether they be in the northern or southern parts) both sets of five practices in sūtras ( 19 and 20 ) were not to be followed. In that connection he quotes several (three) views about Aryāvarta and two verses more, one of which 

 

 

78 The whole passage is interesting 'उपनीतमात्रो व्रतानुचारी वेदानी किविदधीत्य 

ब्राह्मणः । एका शाखामधीत्य श्रोत्रियः । अङ्गाध्याय्यनूचानः । कल्पाध्यायी विकल्पः। Pagal 240: 1 apacita: 134a : 1'a. I. . 2-8. 

FOUNDED 

1911 

1 

0. 

The Brullunyana Dharmısūtra. 

uno 

names the countries in which there is mixture of castes and the 2nd mentions some countries like Āratta (Panjab), Sauvīra, Puṇdra, Vanga, Kalinga, sojourn in which made a person liable to undergo an expiation. The countries mentioned in the first verse are all (except Dakṣiṇāpatha ) to the north of the Narmadā. It is quite probable that he did not like the usage of marrying one's maternaljunole's or paternal aunt's daughter even for southern people. It should be noted that almost all the countries in the 2nd verse are north of the Narmadā. Further, Daksināpatha appears to have meant a country roughly liko modern Mahārāstra long before the Christian era; vide ASWI. Vol. V. p. 60 which shows that in an inscription (No. 1) of Nanaghat (Poona District ) Vedisiri is mentioned as king of Daksināpatha. Vide ASWI Vol. IV. p. 110 and Rudradāman's inscription (E. I. Vol. VIII at p. 44, where Satakarni is said to have been lord of Dakṣiṇāpatha). The fact that Āpastamblyas, Hiraṇyakeśins and Baudhāyaniyas have congregated much more in the suuth than in the north for centuries supports the above statement. The words Uttarā patha and Daksimāpatha were never strictly defined. For example, in the Sanjan plates ( supposed to be spurious ) of Buddhavarasa (E. I. Vol. 14 p. 144 at p. 149 about 700 A. D.) we meet with the words 'Uttarāpa thādhipati-Sri-Harṣadevaparājayopalabdhogra-pratāpah' i. e. king Harsa is said to have been lord of Uttarapatha. If we turn to the Harsacarita of Bāṇa (first paragraph after two initial verses of the 5th Ucchyāsa ) we read 'Atha kadācid-rajā Rajyavardhanam-ābūya Hūṇān hantum...cirantanairamātyaih... kṛtvā sābhisāram-uttarūpatham prāhiṇot'. This shows that Sthānvisvara (modern Thanesar) was not included in Uttarāpatha in Bāna's days. Uttarāpatha occurs in the Hathigumpha Inscription of Khāravela ( E.I. Vol. XX. p.71 at p. 79 and p. 88 ). Pānini knows the word as in V. 1.77 'Uttarāpathenāhrtam ca' ( Uttarāpathenāhrtam auttarāpathikam, Uttarāpathena gaochati auttarapathikah). About Dakṣiṇāpatha the Mahābhāṣya says that large lakes are called 'Sarasi' in Dakṣiṇāpatha (Kielhorn's ed. Vol. I. p. 73). The word 'Dakṣiṇāpatha oocurs in the gana 

dhūmādi' (Pān. IV. %. 127 ). 

The extant Baudhāyanadharmasūtra is certainly later than Gautama, as it mentions Gautama twice by name and as one quota. tion at least is found in the extant Gautama. Besides Baudhāyana quotes by name several teachers on dharma, while Gautama quotes only one, Manu. Baudhāyana is far removed from the times on the Upaniṣads. Baud. (II, 7, 15) quotes a verse which is itself an 

History of Dharmaśāstra 

adaptation of a passage from the Chāndogya-upaniṣad. 79 He quotes Harīta. It is uncertain whether the Hāritadharmasūtra, a manuscript of which was discovered by the late Vaman Sastri Islāmpurkar at Nasik, is the one intended. Bühler thought that the work of Baudhāyana was earlier than that of Āpastamba by a century or two. His first reason was that Kāṇva Baudhāyana receives homage in the tarpaṇa before Āpastamba and Hiraṇyakesin and that the same order is observed in the Baudhayana-gṛhyasūtra. But this reason is far from convincing. It may be conceded that Baudhāyana was regarded as the oldest (or the most authoritative or respectable ) of the three schools of the Black Yajurveda. But from this it does not at all follow that the extant dharina-sūtra of the Baudhāyaniyas is earlier than that of the Āpastambiyas. For aught we know the sūtra compiled for the school of Baudhāyana may be later than the sūtra manual of the Āpastambiyas. We saw above that orthodox opinion, represented by Kumārila, regards Baudhāyana's work as later than Āpastamba's. All the three founders of the three schools are mentioned in the Baudhāyanagṛhya and dharmasūtra. One may equally argue with good reason that both these works knew a sūtra work of Āpastamba and that the extant dharmasūtra of Āpastamba is that work. Another reason assigned for the priority of Baudhāyana's work over Āpastamba's is that, though both have numerous sūtras that agree almost word for word. a comparison of the views of the two writers shows that Āpastamba lays down stricter and more puritanic (and therefore later) views on certain points than Baudhāyana. Gautama, Baudhāyana and Vasiṣṭha mention several secondary sons, while Āpastamba is silent about them, Gautama, Baudhāyana (II. 2. 17, 62 ), Vasiṣṭha and even Viṣṇu approve of the practice of niyoga, while Āpastamba condemns it (II. 6, 13.1-9). Gautama and Baudhāyana (1. 11. 1) speak of eight forms of marriage, while Āpastamba speaks of only six and omits Prājāpatya and Paiśāca (II. 5. 11. 17-20 and II. 5. 12. 1-2). Baudhāyana (II.2.4-6) allowed a larger share to the eldest son on a partition, while Āpastamba condemns such a procedure (II. 6. 14. 10-14). The Baudhāyana-gṛhyasūtra (II. 4, 6) allows upanayana to rathakūra, while Āpastamba (gṛhya 4. 10. 1-4) does not do so (dharmasūtra I. 1. 1. 19). These points are hardly conclusive on the question of date. From 

79 Baud. 'Aigareta un protan sa saudi arealfor 

909fat quad A ta: Il '; compare 9172121Thaty. 24.71 29" थैषीकातूलममौ प्रोतं प्रयतैवं हास्य सर्वे पाप्मानः प्रदूयन्ते' &c. 

FOUNDED 

6. The Biudhāyana Dharmasutra 

very ancient times there was great divergence of opinion among the doctors of the law on most, if not on all, of these points. There is no hard and fast rule that these doctrines were upheld by early writers and condeinned by later ones. Baudhāyana himself quotes the views of an ancient writer, Aupajanghani, who condemned all secondary sons. The verses that Baudhāyana quotes on this point (II. 2. 34-36 ) are quoted by Āpastamba also but without the author's name (Āp. II. 6. 13.6), there being variants only in the first verse. Niyoga was allowed by Manu (9. 56-63 ) and then condemned (9. 64-68) and Bșhaspati refers to this attitude of Manu (vide Kullūka on Manu 9. 68). Even 40 late a writer as Yājñavalkya (II. 131 ) approves of niyoga. About the rathakūra being allowed to consecrate the sacred firos there is a discussion in the sūtras of Jaimini (VI. 1. 44 ff). Vedic passages supported both methods viz. equal division among sons and the bestowal of a larger share on the eldest. Even Yājña valkya (II. 118) allows a larger share to the eldest son. Therefore, hardly anyone of the circumstances relied upon by Bühler as indicating a later age for Āpastamba is conclusive or convincing. The third ground for placing Baudhāyana before Āpastamba is that the style of the former is simpler and older as compared with the latter's. That Baudhāyana is simpler than Āpastamba may be admitted. But this may be due to the fact that Baudhāyana has been tampered with more than Āpastamba. On the other hand Āpastamba contains more un-Pāṇinean forms, more uncouth constructions, more words in an archaic sense than is the case with Bandhāyana. All that is almost certain about the age of the Baudhāyana-dharmasūtra is that it is later than the work of Gautama, that its style, its doctrines and its general out-look on different subjeots do not compel us to assign it a later date than that of the other dharmasūtras. We have adduced evidence to show that long before the days of Śabara ( whose latest date cannot be later than 500 A. D.) the Baudhāyana-dharmasūtra was an authoritative smṛti; it follows that the dlarınasūtra must be placed somewhere between 500-200 B. C. Numerous sūtras are identical in Baudhāyana and Āpastamba e. g. Āp. I. 1. 2. 30 = Baud. I. 2. 40-41, Āp. I. 2. 6. 8-9 = Baud. I. 2. 39, Āp. I. 5. 15.8 = Baud. I. 2. 31, Āp. I. 11. 31. 11 and 16 = Baud. II. 3. 39 and 32. There are several verses that occur in both e. (). Baud. II. 1. 4% = Āp. I. 9. 27. 11, Baud. II. 2. 34-36 = Āp. II. 6. 13. 6 (thtag verses condemning secondary sors), Baud. II. 10. 63 Ap 11. 9. 21. 10, Baud. II. 7. 22-23 = Āp. II. 4. 9. 13. (two verdes1 

History of Dhurmuśustra 

Baud. II. 6. 36 = Āp. II. 9. 24. 8. Besides these there are numerous Vedic quotations that are common to both. All this, however, does not establish anything about their relative position. The Vasiṣṭha-dharmasūtra also has numerous quotations in common with Baud. Vide Vas. I. 15. = Baud. I. 1. 28, Vas. III. 5, 6, 11, 20, 56 = Baud. I. 1, 10, 12, 11, 8 and I. 5. 58. (respectively ); Vas. 6. 20-21 = Baud. II. 7. 22-23; Vas. VIII. 17 = Baud. II, 2, 1 ; Vas. XI. 27-28 = Baud. II. 8. 21-22; Vas. XVI. 34 = Baud. I. 10. 35, Vas. XVII. 73 = Baud. IV, 1. 17, Vas. XVII. 86 = Baud. I. 5. 102; Vas. XXII. 10 = Baud. I. 1. 33. It is to be noted that some of these quotations (Baud, II. 8. 21-22, I. 10. 35) occur in the extant Manusmṛti (III. 125-126 and VIII, 98). There are a few prose sūtras in Vas that are transformed into verse in Baud. and vice versa e. g. Vas. III. 41 (prose) = Baud. 1. 5. 20 (quoted as a verse ), Vas. III. 57 ( quoted as a verse ) = Baud. I. 6. 19-20. It is not likely that one borrows from the other. There are two other possible explanations, viz. that both Baud. and Vas. (and Manu also) quote froin or adapt a common source or that the three works have been tampered with and interpolations introduced at every step. The latter alternative is too sweeping as the number of verses is very large and makes all the old sūtras except that of Gautama valueless for all chronological purposes. One cannot subscribe to the view that such extensive interpolations took place as the latter theory demands. The first alternative appears more reasonable. What that common source was, whether it was a regular work in verse or whether there was a floating mass of such popular verses as Bühler holds, are questions that present Very great difficulties. It is not easy to believe that there hundreds of floating verses on dharmu no body knew by whom composed, on which writers of the centuries preceding the Christian era drew for supporting their opinions. That does not sound as a very likely procedure. It is more probable that such verses were contained in a work or works now lost. 

I tried on pp. 29-31 of the first edition to bring forward arguments on both sides of the question whether Baudhāyana Dh. S. is earlier or later than Āpastamba and on p. 30 stated that the Baud. Dh. 8. may be placed between 500 B. C. and 200 B. C. Dr. Ram Gopal (p. 76 of his work) trots out the plea that I am inconsistent. I have given above an answer to this charge in the case of my remarks about Gautama. So I do not want to rebut here the charge of inconsistency. I am prepared to place Baudhāyana Dh. S. between 600 B. O, to 300 B. All these 

6. 

The Banuelhūljatrict Dhurniusūlrit 

datos are more or less tentative and there is n10 finality about them at least at present. 

In the tarpaṇa, Baud. (II. 5. 21 ) mentions several appellations of Ganesa, viz. Vighna, Virāyaka, Sthūla, Varada, Hastimukha, Vakratunda, Ekadanta, Lambodara. But this affords no certain clue as to date. The worship of Vināyaka is found in tho Mānavagṛhya also. In the tarpeixe (II. 5. 23 ) we have the seven planets montioned in the order of the days of the week and also Rāhu and Ketu ; besidos the twelve names of Viṣṇu occur in II. 5. 24. In II. 1. 44 Baud. speaks of tho profession of an actor or of a teacher of dramaturgy (Natyācārya) as an upapātaka. Soveral sūtras attributed to Baudhāyana on the subject of adoption in the Dattakamimāmsā and other later works are taken from the Baudhāyanagrlyasoșasūtra (11. 6), the gūtras agreeing very closely with Vasiṣṭha ( 15.1-9). 

According to Burnell the oldest commentator on the Baudhāyanaśrauta-sūtra was Bhavasvāmin, whom he placed in the 8th century. The commentary of Govindasvamin on the Dharmasūtra is a learned one and is generally to the point. He appears to be a very late writer. 
