+++
title = "०२ दारयोग्यता"

+++
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/005_asapiNDA_cha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>005 असपिण्डा च ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

असपिण्डा च या मातुर्  
+++(असपिण्डा)+++ असगोत्रा च या पितुः ।  
सा प्रशस्ता द्विजातीनां  
दारकर्मणि मैथुने [मेधातिथिपाठः - अ-मैथिनी]  ॥ ३.५ ॥+++(5)+++
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/005_asapiNDA_cha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

She who is not a “sapiṇḍa” of one’s mother, not of the same “Gotra” as his Father, and who is not born of (unlawful) intercourse—has been recommended for marriage.—(5)


“Three kinds of sapiṇḍā have got to be excluded—


To the first category belongs the girl who is one’s own sapiṇḍā as being the sapiṇḍā of his father, who is the married husband of his mother;—to the second category belongs the girl who is not the sapiṇḍā of that ‘father’ who is only the supporter (not the progenitor), and is one’s own and his natural father’s (progenitor’s) sapiṇḍā,—and who thus is his own sapiṇḍā, but not that of his supporter-‘father’;—and to the third class belongs that girl who is the sapiṇḍā of the supporter-‘father’, but not one’s own sapiṇḍā. All this diversity is based upon the fact that in the case of the ‘adopted’ son (in whose case the supporter-father and the progenitor-father are different), the son’s body (piṇḍa) does not contain the constituent elements of the body of the father.


For the same reasons there are four kinds of ‘father’ also—


Of these the ‘progenitor’, husband of the mother, and the ‘seed-owner’ both transmit the constituents of their body to the child; and on that ground the sāpiṇḍya ‘consanguinity’; of these two Fathers to the Aurasa and Kṣetraja sons would be direct; while that of the ‘field-owner’ (the second kind of ‘father’) would be only indirect, through the field (i.e., the body of his wife); the bodies of the husband and wife having been declared to bo one.—Now the girls that fall within these three kinds of ‘consanguinity would become excluded by the test that ‘one should marry a girl younger than himself, who is not his sapiṇḍā’ (Yājñavalkya 1. 52). But the Sapiṇḍā of the Supporter (adoptive) father would not be the Sapiṇḍā of the adopted son, and as such she would not he excluded by the said text. Hence it becomes necessary to find out a text excluding the ‘father’s Sapiṇḍā;’ and such a text is found in Manu 3. 5 (the present verse). This text clearly implies that the girl who falls within seven degrees of the ‘Sāpiṇḍya’ of the Secondary Father (not the progenitor) is to be avoided; in this sense the term pituḥ, being taken in its etymological sense of one who supports, pāti iti pitā, includes the adoptive, father also.”
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**मातुर् यासपिण्डा पितुश् च यासगोत्रा सा दारकर्मणि प्रशस्ता** । सपिण्डग्रहणं मातृबन्धूपलक्षणार्थम् । मातुर् हि सापिण्ड्यं स्त्रीणां स्मृत्यन्तरे तृतीयपुरुषावधि । न तु त्रिभ्य ऊर्ध्वं मातृबन्धुभ्यो विवाह इष्यते, किं तर्हि, पञ्चमाद् ऊर्ध्वम् । एवं हि गौतमः पठति- "ऊर्ध्वं सप्तमात् पितृबन्धुभ्यो मातृबन्धुभ्यः पञ्चमात्" इति (ग्ध् ४.३–५) । तेन यथाश्रुतिसमन्वयाभावात् सापिण्ड्याभावः स्मृत्यन्तरवशेन मातृसंबन्धितया व्याकरणीयः । तेनैवम् उक्तं स्यात् मातुर् अन्वयजा जाया[^४२] न भवति । अवधिश् च गौतमीय एव । तेन मातामहमातामहयोर्[^४३] ऽन्वये जाता सा पुत्रसंततेर् बान्धवसामीप्यात् पञ्चमीं यावन् न विवाहयितव्या । अतो मातृष्वसृतद्दुहितॄणां प्रमातामहसंततिजानां[^४४] च सर्वासां प्रतिषेधः, बन्धुत्वाविशेषात् ।


[^४४]:
     M G 1st ed.: pramātāmahī-


[^४३]:
     M G 1st ed.: mātāmahī=


[^४२]:
     M G 1st ed.: yā

- **असगोत्रा च या पितुः** । गोत्रं वसिष्ठभृगुगर्गादिवंशः स्मर्यते । समानगोत्रा वसिष्ठा न वसिष्ठैर् विवहन्ते न गर्गा गर्गैः । वासिष्ठे तु मातृसगोत्राया अपि प्रतिषेधः- 

- परिणीय सगोत्रां तु समानप्रवरां तथा । 

- कृत्वा तस्याः समुत्सर्गं द्विजश् चान्द्रायणं चरेत् ।

- मातुलस्य सुतां चैव मातृगोत्रां तथैव च ॥

गौतमेन तु पठ्यते- "असमानप्रवरैर् विवाहः" इति (ग्ध् ४.२) । तत्र गोत्रसमत्वे सत्य् अपि प्रवरभेदश् चेद् युज्यते विवाहः । तद् अयुक्तम्, यतः स्मृत्यन्तरे ह्य् उभयं निषिध्यते- "असमानार्षगोत्रजाम्" (य्ध् १.५३) इति । आर्षं प्रवर इत्य् एको ऽर्थः । कथं पुनर् गोत्रभेदे समानार्षेयत्वम् । किम् इति न भवति यदि स्मर्यते । श्रुतिस्मृतिप्रमाणको ऽयम् अर्थो न प्रत्यक्षगोचरो येन विरोधः स्यात् । के पुनर् अमी प्रवरा नाम । अत्यल्पम् इदम् उच्यते । इदम् अपि वक्तव्यम्- किं पुनर् एतद् ब्राह्मणत्वं नाम, तथा कतरद् एतद् गोत्रं नाम । यथैव समाने पुरुषत्वे ब्राह्मणत्वादिविशेषः, एवं समाने ब्राह्मणत्वे वसिष्ठादिगोत्रभेदः, प्रतिगोत्रं च समानार्षेयाणि । यस्यैतद् गोत्रं तस्य तैः शब्दैः प्रवराश्रयणं कर्तव्यम् । एवं विवाहनिषेधे ऽपि । स्मरन्ति च सूत्रकाराः गोत्रभेदसंबन्धेन प्रवरान्- "यस्यैतद् गोत्रं तस्येमे प्रवराः" इति । गोत्रभेदस् तु तद्गोत्रजैर् एव । स्मर्यते- "वयं पराशरा वयम् उपमन्यवः" इति । यद्य् अपि गोत्रवत् प्रवरान् अपि स्मरन्ति, तथापि बहुत्वात् कदाचिद् विस्मरेयुर् इति गोत्रम् उपलक्षणीकृत्य प्रवरस्मृतिर् उपनिबद्धा । गोत्रं तु स्मरन्ति । न च तस्य किंचिद् उपलक्षणम् अस्ति- य एवंरूपस् तस्येदं गोत्रम् इति । एतावत् तत्र स्मरणम् । यावद्गोत्रं संततिसमानजातीयत्वम्[^४५] । 


[^४५]:
     M G: saṃtatiḥ

- एष च गोत्रप्रवरभेदः ब्राह्मणानां न राजन्यविषाम्[^४६] । तथा हि कल्पसूत्रकारः- "पौरोहित्याद् राजन्यवैशयोः" इति । यद्य् अपि गोत्रविशेषव्यपदेशे सति प्राप्तप्रतिषेधेनापि प्रवराधिकारे वचनम् इदम् उपपद्यते, किं तु न तेषां गोत्रस्मरणम् अस्ति । <u>कस् तर्हि</u> क्षत्रियवैश्ययोर् विवाहे ऽपि बन्धूनाम् अवधेर् नियमः ।


[^४६]:
     M G 1st ed.: brāhmaṇarājanyaviṣām

- <u>उच्यते</u> । सर्ववर्णविषयम् एतत् "ऊर्ध्वं सप्तमात् पितृबन्धुभ्यः" (ग्ध् ४.३) इति । इहाप्य् असगोत्रा, **च**शब्दाद् असपिण्डा । तथा चानुवर्त्यमानः सपिण्डशब्दः पूर्ववद् बन्धुसंबन्धोपलक्षणार्थः । तेन पितृष्वसुर् अन्वयस्त्रीणाम् अन्यासां च प्रपितामहसंततिस्त्रीणां आ सप्तमात् पुरुषात् प्रतिषेधः सिद्धो भवति । सप्तमपुरुषावधयः सपिण्डाः स्मर्यन्ते ।

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु गोत्रं वंशम् आहुः । न तत्रावध्यपेक्षा । यावद् एतज् ज्ञायते वयम् एकवंशा इति तावद् अविवाहः । अस्मिन्न् अपि पक्षे असपिण्डा चेत्य् अनुवर्तते । तेन पूर्ववत् पितृष्वस्रादिदुहितॄणां प्रतिषेधः । अस्मिंस् तु पक्षे समानार्षगोत्राणां प्रतिषेधो दुर्लभः । न हि तत्रैतद् अस्ति वयम् एकवंश्या इति ।

- <u>उच्यते</u> । ऐतिहासिकेन तद्दर्शनेन समर्थयन्ते । तत्र हि वर्णयन्ति । "ऋषिर् वसिष्ठादिर् आद्यो वंशस्य कर्ता तद्गोत्रास् ततः प्रसूताः प्रवराः" इति तत्पुत्रपौत्रास् तपोविद्याद्यतिशयगुणयोगेन प्रख्याततमाः । स्मृत्यन्तराद् एष एव नियमः । 

- इदं त्व् अत्र निरूप्यं यद् एतत् समानप्रवरैर् इति तत्र नामधेयतस् तावत् समानत्वं न संख्यातः । नामधेयसमानत्वे च किं यत्र सर्वाण्य् एव समानानि तत्र प्रतिषेध उतैकस्मिन्न् अपि समाने । तत्र यदि समुदितानां प्रवरत्वम्, तत्र समाने कस्मिंश्चिद् भिन्ने ऽन्यस्मिन्न् अन्यः समुदायः संजात इत्य् असमानप्रवरत्वाच् च प्रतिषेधः । एवं चोपमन्यूनां पराशराणां च स्याद् विवाहः । भिन्नं तयोर् गोत्रम् । एक उपमन्यवः अपरे पराशराः, पूर्वेण च न्यायेन प्रवरभेदः । उपमन्यूनां वासिष्ठभारद्वाजैकपाद् इति प्रवराः । पराशराणां वासिष्ठगार्ग्यपाराशर्येति । अथैकैकस्य प्रवरत्वम् एकस्मिन्न् अपि समाने प्रतिषेधः । तद् यथा माषा न भोक्तव्या, मिश्रा अपि न भुज्यन्ते । 

- किं पुनर् अत्र युक्तम् । एकैकस्य प्रवरत्वम् । तथा हि सामानाधिकरण्यं दृश्यते । एकं वृणीते द्वौ वृणीते त्रीन् वृणीत इति प्रतिपन्न एकः । तत्साम्ये ऽप्य् आहैषाम् अविवाह इति ।

- **द्विजाति**ग्रहणम् उपलक्षणार्थम् । शूद्रस्यापि आ सप्तमात् पितृतः पञ्चमान् मातृत[^४७] इत्य् अस्ति । दारकरणं दारक्रिया **दारकर्म** । तत्र **प्रशस्ता** प्रशंसया विहितेत्य् अर्थः । **मैथुनी** । मिथुने भवा **मैथुनी**, न मैथुनी अमैथुनी । पितुर् इति संबध्यते, पितृबीजाद् एवोत्पन्ना जातमात्रा । नियोगो विहितस् तत उत्पन्नाया नास्ति पूर्वोक्तविशेषणैर् निषेधः । अतः पृथङ् निषिध्यते **अमैथुनीति** । ततो नियोगोत्पन्ना कामतो न विवाह्या, मैथुनीत्वात् । 


[^४७]:
     M G 1st ed. omit: pañcamān mātṛta

- अन्ये तु **अमैथुने** इति पठन्ति । धर्मार्थे दारकर्मणि प्रशस्ता, न मैथुने । स्तुतिश् चेयं न प्रतिषेधः । ईदृशी योढा सा सत्य् अपि मैथुने धर्मार्थैव भवति ॥ ३.५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The text proceeds to show what sort of maiden should be married.

‘*She who is not a sapiṇḍa of one’s mother*, *and who is not of the same
gotra as his Father, has been recommended for marriage*.’ The term
‘*sapiṇḍa*’ indicates the relations on the mother’s side. According to
another Smṛti, women are called the “mother’s sapiṇḍa” only up to three
steps of relationship. But, as a matter of fact, marriage with relatives
on the mother’s side is permitted beyond not the *third*, but the
*fifth*, step of relationship. Says Gautama (4—3 and 5)—‘Beyond the
seventh step of relationship on the Father’s side and beyond the fifth
step on the mother’s side.’ Thus, inasmuch as the term ‘*sapiṇḍa*’
cannot be taken here in its literal sense (of relation within *three*
steps of relationship), it has to be explained, in accordance with other
*Smṛtis* (such as Gautama), as standing for ‘mother’s relation.’ The
meaning thus comes to be—‘She who is not born of the mother’s family;’
and the limit of *relationship* is to be taken as prescribed by Gautama.
So that one should not marry the girl who is descended either from his
maternal grandfather or great-grandfather, up to five steps downwards,
on account of the closeness of relationship among the descendants of
these. Hence the mother’s sister, the daughter of the mother’s sister,
as also those descended from the maternal great-grandmother, all these
become excluded, on the ground of all of them being ‘relations.’

‘*She who is not of the same gotra as his Father*—The term ‘*gotra*’ has
been declared to stand for the descendants of

Vaśiṣṭha, Bhṛgu, Garga and the rest.—‘*Of the same gotra*’ means
*belonging to same gotra*. That is, a ‘Vaśiṣṭha’ girl cannot be married
by a ‘Vaśiṣṭha’ boy; nor the ‘Garga’ girl by a ‘Garga’ boy.

In the *Vaśiṣṭha* (Dharmaśāstra), there is prohibition also of the girl
belonging to the same *gotra* as one’s mother. It says—‘If the
twice-born person marries a girl of the same *gotra* or the same
*Pravara* as himself, he shall renounce her and perform the penance of
the Cāndrāyaṇa; so also if he has married the daughter of his maternal
uncle, or a girl of the same *gotra* as his mother.’

Gautama says—‘There is marriage between parties not having the same
*Pravara*’ (4.2); so that if the *Pravara* is different, there may be
marriage, even though the *gotra* happen to be the same.

This, however, is not right; because another Smṛti (Yājñavalkya) has
prohibited both—‘one should marry a girl born of a *different gotra and
Ṛṣi*’ (Acāra, 53),—where ‘*Ṛṣi*’ stands for ‘pravara.’

“But how can a girl be born of the same *Ṛṣis* when her *gotra* is
different?”

Why may this not be possible when the *Smṛti* distinctly speaks of it?
This subject is one that falls entirely within the purview of *Śruti and
Smṛti*, and is beyond our perception; so that there could be no
incongruity (in what is directly asserted in the *Smṛti*).

“What are ‘*pravaras*,’ after all?”

Well, you are asking too little; you might as well ask—‘What is a
Brāhmaṇa?’ ‘What is a gotra?’ In fact, just as the generic character of
‘man’ being equally present in all men, the ‘Brāhmaṇa’ and the rest
constitute the particular species included under that generic
character,—exactly in the same manner, the generic character of
‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ being common among a number of men, ‘*Vaśiṣṭha*’ and the
rest come in as specific sub-divisions; and related to each ‘*gotra*’
there are a few names of ‘*Ṛṣis*;’ and the person who belongs to a
certain ‘*gotra*’ has to connect himself with these Ṛṣi-names, which are
called his ‘*pravara*.’ This same is the meaning of the term ‘*pravara*’
in connection with the prohibition of marriage.

The writers of Sūtras have mentioned the *pravaras* along with each
distinct *gotra*, in such words as—‘such and such are the *pravaras* of
the person belonging to such and such a *gotra*.’ As for the distinct
*gotras*, these are duly remembered by the persons born in those
*gotras* themselves—‘we belong to the ‘*Parāśara-gotra*,’ ‘we belong to
the *Upamanyu-gotra*,’ and so forth. Though, like.their *gotra*, people
remember their *pravaras* also, yet inasmuch as the number of *pravaras*
is large, it was thought that people might forget them, and hence the
Smṛtis were written for the purpose of mentioning the *pravaras*
connected with each of the *gotras*. As for the *gotra*, save that
people themselves remember it, there is no other indicative in the form
that ‘he who is like this and that belongs to such and such a *gotra*.
All that has been declared in connection with *gotra* is that persons
belonging to the same *gotra* must belong to a common stock and a common
caste.

This diversity of *Gotra* and *Pravara* is found only among Brāhmaṇas,
not Kṣatriyas and Vaiśyas. Say the authors of the *Kalpasūtra*—‘that of
the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya is determined by that of their priests.’ On
the ground of this Kalpasūtra-statement occurring in the section dealing
with *Pravara*, it might be construed to be a denial of *pravara* only,
which might be understood to apply to those two castes also by reason of
particular *gotras* having been mentioned in relation to them. But, in
reality, there are no *gotras* mentioned in connection with them.

“Under the circumstances, what sort of restriction would there be on the
point of relationship, in connection with marriages?”

Our answer is as follows:—The rule of Gautama (4. 3), that ‘it should be
beyond the seventh step among the relations on the father’s side,’ is
common to all castes (and this would supply the necessary limitation).

In the present verse also the term ‘*not of the same gotra*’ means ‘who
is not a *Sapiṇḍa*;’ and, just as the term ‘*sapiṇda*,’ in the preceding
phrase, so the same term here also, would be taken as standing for
‘relations;’ and in this way we secure the exclusion of girls descended
from the father’s sister, as also of other girls descended from one’s
great-grandfather, up to the seventh step. And it is only persons up to
the seventh step of relationship that have been called ‘*sapiṇḍa*.’

Others have explained ‘*gotra*’ to mean *family*. And in this case,
there is no need for any limit; there can be no marriage among parties
who know each other as ‘belonging to the same family.’ In accordance
with this view also the term ‘*asapiṇḍā*’ has to be construed twice
over; so that, as before, the daughter of the father’s sister and Others
become excluded.

“But, according to this view, the exclusion of girls belonging to the
same *gotra* and having the same *pravaras* becomes difficult. As among
these there is no such idea as that ‘we belong to the same family.’”

The answer to the above is that this difficulty is sought to be
explained by a reference to tradition. There is a tradition that
‘Vaśiṣṭha and others like him are the prime progenitors of families, and
persons descended from them and belonging to their *gotra* are the
*Pravaras*, who were their sons and grandsons endowed with excellent
austerities and learning and vastly famous.’ \[ And in this sense
‘persons belonging to the same *gotra* and having the same *pravaras*’
may be regarded as ‘belonging to the same family.’\] In other *Smṛtis*
also we find the same rule.

The following facts, however, have to be borne in mind in this
connection:—In the phrase, ‘having the same *pravaras*,’ the *sameness*
is in regard to the *names*, not the mere *number*, of *Pravaras*; and
the question arises, whether the prohibition applies to all cases where
al the Pravara-names are the same, or only to those where even one name,
happens to be common. If the whole set of names constitutes the
‘*pravara*,’ then there is no ‘sameness of Pravara’ in a case where a
few names are common but others are different, and hence the ‘set of
names’ in the two cases becomes different; so that the prohibition would
not apply to such a case; and marriage could take place between the
*Upamanyus* and the *Parāśaras*, whose *gotras* are different,—one
belonging to the *Gotra* of Upamanyu, and the other to the *gotra* of
Parāśara,—but there is difference in their. ‘*pravaras*,’ in the Sense
noted above; because for the ‘*Upamanyu gotra*’ the *Pravaras* are
‘Vaśiṣṭha, Bharadvāja and Ekapāt,’ while for the ‘*Parāśara gotra*’ they
are ‘Vaśiṣṭhya, Gārgya and Parāśarya.’ If, on the other hand, only one
name constituted the ‘Pravara’—and not the whole set, then the
prohibition would apply to even such cases where a single name happens
to be common. *E.g*., when it is said ‘*Māṣa* grains should not be
eaten,’ one ceases to eat even mixed *Māṣa* grains.

What, then, is the right view?

The right view is that single names constitute ‘*pravara*; it is in
accordance with this that we find such usage as ‘*ekam vṛṇīte*,’ ‘*dvau
vṛnīte*,’ ‘*trīn vṛnīte*,’—where there is co-ordination between ‘one,’
‘two’ and ‘three’ with the ‘*Pravara*;’ and it is said that ‘there
should be no marriage even when, one pravara-name is common.’

The mention of the ‘twice-born person’ is merely indicative; as for the
*Śūdra also* there is no marriage up to seven grades of relationship on
the father’s aide, and five on the mother’s side.

‘*Marriage*’—*i.e*., taking to wife.

‘*Recommended*’—enjoined with commendation.

‘*Who is not born of (unlawful) intercourse*,’ *i.e*., who is born
directly from her lawful father. ‘*Niyoga*’ (begetting of offspring by
the widow) having been permitted, the girl who would be born under that
form would not be excluded by the foregoing qualifications; hence she is
separately excluded by the term ‘*who its not born of unlawful
intercourse*;’ which means that one should not voluntarily marry a girl
born, of ‘Niyoga,’ because she is born of unlawful intercourse.

Others read ‘*Amaithune*’ (for ‘*Amaithunī*), and explain it to mean
that the girl described has been recommended as an associate at
religions functions, and *not for sexual intercourse*.

And such a prohibition would be by way of eulogy; the sense being—‘if
one marries a girl with these qualifications, she fulfills his religious
functions, even though there be no sexual intercourse.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Asapiṇḍā ca yā mātuḥ—asagotrā ca yā pituḥ*’—Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and
Rāghavānanda hold the first ‘*ca*’ to mean that the ‘sagotrā’ of the
mother also is excluded; this exclusion is supported by Vaśiṣṭha as
quoted by Medhātithi;—according to Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Kullūka,
Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda, the second ‘*ca*’ connects the ‘*asapiṇḍā*’
with ‘*pituḥ*’ also. But there appears to be no point in this as the
father’s ‘*asapiṇḍā*’ would be already included under the father’s
‘*asagotrā*’. Medhātithi appears to have been conscious of this, as he
adds that the term ‘*sapiṇḍa*’ here stands for ‘relations’ \[see
*Trans*. p. 26, ll. 3-4, which should be as follows, and not as it
appears there—“*In the present phrase* ‘*asagotrā ca pituḥ*’, *the
particle* ‘*ca*’ *excludes the fathers sapiṇḍā also*.”\]

‘*Amaithunī*’—This is the reading adopted by Medhātithi, to whom Buhler
wrongly attributes the reading ‘*maithune*’ (‘for conjugal union’),
which is the reading of Govindarāja, Nārāyaṇa and Kullūka, the last
however explaining it to mean ‘(she is recommended) for the Firelaying,
child-begetting and other acts to be performed by the husband and wife
jointly.’—Medhātithi notes a third reading ‘*amaithune*’, and explains
it to mean that ‘the girl is recommended as an associate at religious
functions, and *not for sexual intercourse*, though he does not consider
this satisfactory.—Medhātithi’s reading ‘*amathunī*’ has been explained
by him to mean ‘not born of unlawful intercourse’, and added for the
purpose of excluding the girl horn of *Niyoga*. Though Nandana also
adopts this same reading, he explains it as one ‘who has had no sexual
intercourse.’

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 81) in support of the view that
the girl to be married should be one who is ‘*asapiṇḍā*’ on both the
paternal and the maternal sides; it adds that ‘*asagotrā*’ alone would
preclude the *father’s* ‘sagotrā’ also (the gotra of the man being the
same as his father’s); the word ‘*pituḥ*’ has therefore been added with
a view to the ‘*putrikāputra*’.—Such a girl is ‘recommended’—for
‘*dārakarma*’—such rites as cannot be performed without a wife and for
‘*maithune*’, *i.e*., such rites as can he done only conjointly by the
pair, *e.g*. the *Pākayajña*, and the like,—‘*asapiṇḍā ca yā mātuḥ*’ is
meant to preclude the marrying of the daughter of the maternal uncle,
she being the man’s ‘mother’s *sapiṇḍā*’.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 468), where the
following explanation is added—‘who is *asapiṇḍā* of the mother, as also
her *asagotrā*—who is *asagotrā* of the father, and also his
*asapiṇḍā*,—is recommended for all acts to be performed by the
couple’.—It raises the question that the separate mention of the
‘mother’ is superfluous; as the wife has no ‘*piṇḍa*’ or ‘*gotra*’ apart
from the husband; so that the ‘*asapiṇḍā*’ and ‘*asagotrā*’ of the
‘mother’ would be the same as those of the ‘father’;—and supplies the
answer that in the case of the *Gāndharva* and some other forms of
marriage, the bride being not given away by her father, she retains her
*gotra* and *piṇḍa*; so that her ‘*sapinda*’ and ‘*asagotra*’ would not
be the same as those of her husband.

In connection with this verse a peculiar point of view has been set
forth by ‘some people’ in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 691):—

> “Three kinds of *sapiṇḍā* have got to be excluded—
>
> 1.  who is one’s own and his father’s *sapiṇḍā*,
> 2.  who is one’s own *sapiṇḍā*, but not the *sapiṇḍā* of his father,
> 3.  who is not one’s own *sapiṇḍā*, but is the father’s *sapiṇḍā*.
>
> To the first category belongs the girl who is one’s own *sapiṇḍā* as
> being the *sapiṇḍā* of his father, who is the married husband of his
> mother;—to the second category belongs the girl who is not the
> *sapiṇḍā* of that ‘father’ who is only the *supporter* (not the
> *progenitor*), and is one’s own and his natural father’s
> (progenitor’s) *sapiṇḍā*,—and who thus is his own *sapiṇḍā*, but *not*
> that of his supporter-‘father’;—and to the third class belongs that
> girl who is the *sapiṇḍā* of the supporter-‘father’, but not one’s own
> *sapiṇḍā*. All this diversity is based upon the fact that in the case
> of the ‘adopted’ son (in whose case the supporter-father and the
> progenitor-father are different), the son’s body (*piṇḍa*) does not
> contain the constituent elements of the body of the father.
>
> For the same reasons there are four kinds of ‘father’ also—
>
> 1.  the progenitor, the husband of the mother;
> 2.  the owner of the ‘field, *i.e*. the mother’s husband, who is not
>     the progenitor;
> 3.  the owner of the ‘seed’, *i. e*. the progenitor, who is not the
>     husband of the mother;
> 4.  and the supporter, *i.e*. the adoptive father.
>
> Of these the ‘progenitor’, husband of the mother, and the ‘seed-owner’
> both transmit the constituents of their body to the child; and on that
> ground the *sāpiṇḍya* ‘consanguinity’; of these two Fathers to the
> *Aurasa* and *Kṣetraja* sons would be direct; while that of the
> ‘field-owner’ (the second kind of ‘father’) would be only indirect,
> through the *field* (*i.e*., the body of his wife); the bodies of the
> husband and wife having been declared to bo *one*.—Now the girls that
> fall within these three kinds of ‘consanguinity would become excluded
> by the test that ‘one should marry a girl younger than himself, who is
> not his *sapiṇḍā*’ (Yājñavalkya 1. 52). But the *Sapiṇḍā* of the
> Supporter (adoptive) father would not be the *Sapiṇḍā* of the adopted
> son, and as such she would not he excluded by the said text. Hence it
> becomes necessary to find out a text excluding the ‘father’s
> *Sapiṇḍā*;’ and such a text is found in Manu 3. 5 (the present verse).
> This text clearly implies that the girl who falls within seven degrees
> of the ‘*Sāpiṇḍya*’ of the *Secondary Father* (not the progenitor) is
> to be avoided; in this sense the term *pituḥ*, being taken in its
> etymological sense of one *who supports*, *pāti iti pitā*, includes
> the *adoptive*, father also.”

This view is not accepted by the author of *Vīramitrodaya* himself, who
takes Manu’s text to mean the exclusion of the girl who is one’s
*Sapiṇḍā* or *Sagotrā* either through his father or through his mother.

*Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 106) quotes this verse, explaining *daṛa-karma* as
‘the act of making a wife’ *i.e*., *the, taking of a wife*.

The first half of the verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1. 53, p. 34)
in the sense that the *sagotrā* girl is to be excluded.

*Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 690) quotes this verse and adds that the second
‘*ca*’ excludes the father’s ‘*Sapiṇḍā*’ also. Here also we have a
reproduction of the discussion found in *Parāśaramādhava* (see above).

The verse is quoted also in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 133), which adds the
following explanatory notes:—The meaning of this is as follows—The girl
who is *not-sapiṇḍā* of the mother,—and also her *not-sagotrā*, which is
implied by the first ‘*ca*’—is recommended, *i.e*., is fit for being
married. The purport of all this is as follows—Twice-born men are
entitled to marry girls belonging to the same caste as themselves, as
also those belonging to lower castes; the marriage with a girl of the
same caste is the principal or primary form of it, while that with a
girl of a different caste is only secondary;—for the married man two
kinds of acts have been enjoined—sacrifices and intercourse; and in the
text the former set of acts is spoken of by the term ‘*dāra-karma*’, and
the latter set by the term ‘*maithuna*’

Having explained the verse, *Madanapārijāta* also raises the question
why the *Sapiṇḍā* and *Sagotrā* of the *Mother* should be mentioned
apart from that of the *Father*, and deals with it in a somewhat
different manner from that in *Parāśaramādhava* or *Vidhānapārijāta*.
Its answer is that the separate mention is meant to meet the following
case—Devadatta has for Ids mother the *adopted* daughter (of his
grandfather), who has been ‘appointed’ by her adoptive ‘father’;—hence
Devadatta does not inherit the *gotra* of his Progenitor-father;—now the
husband of the aforesaid adopted daughter (*i. e*. the progenitor of
Devadatta) has adopted a daughter, who is the *Sapiṇḍā* of her adoptive
father (Devadatta’s Progenitor), but not the *Sapiṇḍā* of
Devadatta;—thus Devadatta might marry the adopted daughter of his
progenitor. This contingency has been prevented by the separate
exclusion of the ‘Mother’s *Sapiṇḍā*; as the girl, though not the
*Sapiṇḍā* of Devadatta or his adoptive Father, would still be the
*Sapiṇḍā* of his mother, whose *piṇḍa* is one with that of her husband,
(the adoptive father of the girl concerned).

Another question raised is why should the mother’s *asapiṇḍā*, who is
included in the mother’s *asagotrā* implied by the *eha* in the text, be
mentioned separately?—The ‘mother’s *Sapiṇḍā*’ has got to be so
mentioned for the purpose of excluding the girl born in the family of
the father of one’s step-mother, who is one’s own ‘*asapiṇḍā*’, as also
the ‘*asagotrā*’ of the mother, but is the ‘*sapiṇḍā*’ of the mother; so
that if the text had excluded only the ‘mother’s *asagotrā*,’ the said
girl would he marriageable; she becomes excluded, however, by the
condition that she should *not* he his *Another’s sapiṇḍā*’.

It goes on to raise a. further question that the phrase ‘*asagotrā ca
pituḥ*’ need not be taken to include the father’s ‘*asapiṇḍā*’ also, as
the latter is already included under the term ‘father’s *asagotrā*’.—The
answer to this is that the separate exclusion of the ‘father’s
*sapiṇḍā*’ is necessary in view of the following case:—Devadatta’s
father, Yajñadatta, is the adopted son of his father, Bhānudatta,—a girl
is born in the family of Yajñadatta’s *progenitor-father*,—this girl
would be *asagotrā* of Devadatta’s ‘father’ (adoptive), and also
‘*asagotrā*’ of his ‘mother’:—thus there would be a likelihood of
Devadatta marrying this girl;—and this becomes precluded by taking the
‘ca’ to mean the ‘*father’s asapiṇḍā*’. If this had not been intended by
Manu, he would have said ‘*one’s own asagotrā*’ (‘*asagotrā ca
yātmanaḥ*’). Thus the upshot of all this is that the girl to be married
should be ‘*asapiṇḍā* and *asagotrā*’ of his Mother, and also
‘*asapiṇḍā* and *asagotrā* of his Father’.

This verse is quoted also in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 196);—in
*Gotra-pravara-nibandha-kadamba* (p. 131), which adds the following
notes:—In as much as the text forbids only the ‘*sapiṇḍā*’ of the
mother, it follows that the *sagotrā* of the mother is not forbidden;—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 184), which adds the following
explanation:—The girl who is not ‘*sapiṇḍā*’ either of the bridegroom or
of his mother, and who is not the ‘*sagotrā*’ of the bridegroom or his
father, is commended for the purpose of marriage;—in *OodādharUpaddhati*
(Kālasāra, p. 223), which adds the following notes—‘*Dārakarmaṇi*’, in
the rite that makes a ‘wife’,—‘*maithune*’, in the act of intercourse
*which is consummated conjointly by man and woman*;—the sense is that
the said girl is commended not only for cooking and such other acts as
are done by the woman alone, but also in that joint act which is done by
both conjointly; according to *Kalpataru*, ‘*maithune*’ means ‘in the
begetting of the lawful son by means of sexual intercourse’.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 477), in support of
the view that not only the girl, but her family also should be carefully
examined;—also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 588);—in *Aparārka* (p.
84);—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 508);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra,
p. 204).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (4. 2-5).—‘Marriage should he performed with persons not
belonging to the same *Pravara*;—above the Seventh grade among his
paternal relations;—also beyond persons of the same *seed*;—and above
the fifth grade among maternal relations.’

*Vaśiṣṭḥa* (8. 1, 2).—‘He should marry a girl who has no common Ṛṣi (as
her ancestor).........; nor one who is in the seventh grade among his
paternal and in the fifth grade among his maternal relations.’

*Bodhāyana* (2. 1. 38).—‘If he unknowingly marries a girl who is of the
same *gotra* as his mother, he should maintain her as his mother; if he
has got a child from her, he should perform the following
expiation.........’

*Viṣṇu* (24.9-10).—‘He should obtain a wife who is not the same *gotra*
as himself nor with the same *Pravara-ṛṣis*; and who is beyond the fifth
grade of his maternal, and beyond the seventh grade of his paternal
relations.’

*Viṣṇu* (*Aparārka*, p. 82).—‘Those who marry within the seventh and
fifth grades, and the children of such marriages, become outcasts and
Śūdras.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.53).—‘The girl who is free from disease, has a brother,
and does not belong to the same *gotra* or the same Ṛṣis, and who is
above the fifth and seventh grades of relationship on the maternal and
paternal sides respectively.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (3.4.4,5).—‘The girl who does not belong to the
same *gotra*, and who is not his mother’s *sapiṇḍa*.’

*Laghu-Śātātapa* (37).—\[Reproduces Manu.\]

*Śātātapa* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 590).—‘First of all there should be purity
regarding *gotra* and *pravara*, and then that regarding the fifth and
seventh grades of relationship.’

*Baudhāyana* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 590).—‘One born of a woman of the same
*gotra* as her husband is a Caṇḍāla.’

*Śātātapa* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 683).—‘If one marries the daughter of his
maternal uncle, or a girl who is of the same *gotra* as his mother, or
of the same *pravara*,—he should renounce her and perform the Cāndrāyaṇa
penance.’

*Sumanta* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 683, Aparārka, p. 80).—‘Having married the
daughter of his father’s sister, or that of his mother’s sister, or one
who is of the same *gotra* as his mother, or of the same *pravara*,—one
should perform the Cāndrāyaṇa; he shall give her up, but support her.’

*Sumanta* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 702).—‘Girls are unmarriageable up to the
seventh grade on the father’s side, and up to the fifth grade on the
other sides.’

*Vyāsa* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 683).—‘Some people hold that one should not
marry a girl who has the same *gotra* as his mother.’

*Kāṭhaka Gṛhya* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 683).—‘One should not marry a girl
who has the same *gotra* and the same *pravara* as his father, nor one
who is of the same *gotra* as his mother.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 684).—‘One should avoid a girl
who, as regards his father, is of the same *gotra* or of the same
*pravara*; but as regards his mother, only one who has the same *gotra*
(the sameness of *pravara* in this latter case does not matter).’

*Pāraskara* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 702).—‘*Jñāti*-relationship
extends to the seventh grade, or to the tenth.’

*Yājñavalkya* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 702).—‘From the seventh or the
tenth grade extends the *Jñāti*-relationship.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 703).—‘On the father’s and on the
mother’s side, the *sapiṇḍatā* (consanguinity) ceases beyond the seventh
and the fifth grades of relationship respectively.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, 703).—‘One should select a girl
who has no *pravara-* sage in common with him,—avoiding seven grades on
the father’s and five on the mother’s side.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 704).—‘In marriage one should
avoid three grades on the mother’s side and five grades on the
father’s.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 704).—‘One shall select a girl who
has been found to be endowed with the three qualifications, and he
should avoid seven grades on his father’s, and five on his mother’s
side.’

*Nārada* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, 407).—‘Within the seventh and the
fifth grades of relationship from the father and the mother
respectively—a girl is unmarriageable; as also one who has the same
*gotra or pravara*.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 703).—‘The householder shall
marry a girl who is in the fifth grade on his mother’s side and in the
seventh on the father’s.’

*Ślokavaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 703).—‘One should marry the
girl who is the seventh on his father’s side and fifth on his mother’s
side.’

*Viṣṇu-purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 703).—‘O king, the
householder shall marry, in the proper form, a girl who is fifth on his
mother’s side and seventh on his father’s side.’

*Śaṅkha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 704),—‘One shall acquire rightfully
a wife, who is not born of the same *gotra* or the same *pravara* as
himself,—and who happens to he the fifth on mother’s and seventh on the
father’s side.’

*Manu and Viṣṇu* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 704).—‘*Sapiṇḍatā* ceases
in the seventh grade.’

*Chaturviṁshatimata* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, 704).—‘On both sides, one
should marry the girl in the third and the fourth grades.’

*Saṭtṛṁshanmata* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, 704).—‘Manu has declared that
one may marry the girl who is in the third grade on the mother’s side
and in the third grade on the father’s side.’
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

005	A damsel who is neither a Sapinda on the mother's side, nor belongs to the same family on the father's side, is recommended to twice-born men for wedlock and conjugal union.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/006_mahAnty_api.md">
<details open><summary><h3>006 महान्त्य् अपि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

+++(अस्य विस्तारो [ऽत्र](https://www.wisdomlib.org/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc199777.html)। )+++

महान्त्य् अपि समृद्धानि  
गो-ऽजावि-धन-धान्यतः ।  
स्त्रीसम्बन्धे दशैतानि  
कुलानि परिवर्जयेत्  ॥ ३.६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/006_mahAnty_api.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In female connection one should avoid these (following) ten families,—even though they be great and rich in the possession of cattle, goat and sheep and grain.—(6).
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वक्ष्यमाणस्य प्रतिषेधस्य निन्दार्थवादो ऽयम् । **समृद्धिः** संपत्तिः । **धनं** विभवः । **महान्त्य् अपि** प्रकृष्टान्य् अपि । धनविशेषणार्थम् आह **गोऽजाविधनधान्यतः** । तृतीयार्थे तसिः । गोऽजाविधनेन च धान्येन च । **धन**ग्रहणं गोऽजादीनां विशेषणार्थम् । धनरूपा ये गोऽजादयः । कूटसंपन्नता हि धान्यं । **स्त्रीसंबन्धो** विवाहः ।स्त्रीप्राप्त्यर्थं संबन्धः **स्त्रीसंबन्धः** ॥ ३.६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse is a deprecatory exhortation, supplementary to the
Prohibition coming later.

‘*Rich*’ denotes *prosperity*.

‘*Possession*’—*property*.

‘*Though great*’—*high*.

The possessions are farther specified—‘*in the possession of catlle,
&c., &c*.’ The affix ‘*tas*’ *in ‘gojavidhanadhānyataḥ*’ has the force
of the Instrumental; the construction being—‘*gojāvidhanena-dhānyena*.’
The term ‘*possession*’ has been added for the purpose of qualifying
‘*cattle*’ etc., the sense being ‘cattle and the rest, which constitute
*possession*.’

‘*Grain*’ stands for property in the shape of *kūṭa* (?)

‘*Female-connection*’—*i.e*., Marriage—the compound being construed as
‘the connection for the purpose of obtaining a female mate.’—(6)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 6-7)**

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (1.5.1).—‘First of all, one should examine the
family—on the father’s as also on the mother’s side, etc., etc.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.54).—‘\[The girl should be selected\] from a Śrotriya
family of which ten generations are well known, which is expansive and
which is not beset with the defect of an infectious disease.’

*Laghu-Śātātapa* (36).—‘One shall not marry a girl whose father is not
known.’

*Viṣṇu* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 587).—‘In connection with the
marriage of Brāhmaṇas, what should be heeded is the family.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 588).—‘The following are the fourteen
families in which one should not marry: (1) One should avoid such
Brāhmaṇa-families as have their *Pravaras* unknown, and also (2) the
family of hereditary (professional) priests; (3) a family of which the
members are too tall; (4) that of which the members are too short; (5)
that of which the members are of too pronounced a complexion; (6) the
family of which several members have a limb wanting; (7) that of which
several members have too many limbs; (8) that of which the members
suffer from dyspepsia; (9) that of which the members suffer from
leucoderma, or (10) leprosy and such other diseases; (11) that of which
the members are too lascivious; (12) that of which the members are given
up entirely to Tāntric practices; (13) the Family of which the members
suffer from epilepsy or (14) from paleness.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 589)—‘\[Such objectionable families
are to be avoided, because\] the offspring is of the same nature as the
family.’

*Hārīta* (Aparārka, p. 84).—‘The following families are to be avoided
even though they he not outcasts: In which there, has been lucoderma, or
leprosy, or dropsy or pthisis or other infectious deseases, in which
members have been shortlived or suffering from piles; of which the
*Gotra* and *Pravara Ṛṣiṣ* are not known, or that, in which the Veda is
unknown or one which has the same *Ṛṣis*. The first six are to ho
avoided because the offspring takes after the family; of the unknown
*Gotra-Pravara* is to he avoided because such a family would he unlit
for sacrificial performances; and one in which the Veda is unknown is to
be avoided, because it would he unfit, for divine rites; one having the
same *Ṛṣis* as the man himself is to he avoided because it is the same
family. For these reasons one should examine seven generations on the
father’s side and live on the mother’s side and then select as his wife
a girl who has not attained puberty, is endowed with superior qualities
and has a brother. He shall always select one who is fully qualified as
regards family, the asterism under which she has been born, and learning
and wisdom.’
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

006	In connecting himself with a wife, let him carefully avoid the ten following families, be they ever so great, or rich in kine, horses, sheep, grain, or (other) property,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/007_hIna-kriyan_niSh-puruSham.md">
<details open><summary><h3>007 हीन-क्रियन् निष्-पुरुषम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

हीन-क्रियं निष्-पुरुषं  
निश्-छन्दो रोमशार्शसम् ।  
क्षयामयाव्य्-अपस्मारि-  
श्वित्रि-कुष्ठि-कुलानि च  ॥ ३.७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/007_hIna-kriyan_niSh-puruSham.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Such families as—(1) that in which the sacred rites have been abandoned, (2) which is male-less, (3) which is devoid of the Veda, (4) members of which are woolly and subject to (5) piles, (6) phthisis, (7) dyspepsia, (8) epilepsy, (9) leucoderma, and (10) leprosy.—(7)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**हीनास्** त्यक्ताः **क्रिया** यस्मिन् कुले जातकर्मादयः । संस्कारा न क्रियन्ते, नित्याश् च पञ्चयज्ञादयः । **निष्पुरुषं** स्त्रीप्रसु । यत्र प्रायेण कन्या जायन्ते न पुमांसः । **निश्छन्दः** वेदाध्ययनवर्जितम् । **रोमशार्शसम्** । द्वन्द्वैकवद्भावेन कुलद्वयं निर्दिष्टम् । बहुदीर्घैर् बाह्वादिषु लोमभिर् युतम् । **अर्शांसि** गुदेन्द्रियगतान्य् अधिमांसनिबद्धानि, तानि हि रोगरूपत्वात् पीडाकराणि । **क्षयो** राजयक्ष्माव्याधिः । **आमयावी** मन्दाग्निर् यस्य भुक्तम् अन्नं सम्यङ् न जीर्यति । **अपस्मारः** स्मृतिभ्रंशाद्युपघातकृत् । **श्वित्रं** शरीरगता च्छेदवती श्वेतता । **कुष्ठं** प्रसिद्धम् । सर्व एते व्याधिविशेषवचनाः शब्दा रोमशाद् आरभ्य मत्वर्थीयप्रत्ययान्ता निर्दिष्टाः । पूर्वैर् व्याख्यातृभिर् दृष्टमूलतास्य प्रतिषेधस्य वर्णिता । मातुः कुलं द्विपदो ऽनुहरन्ति । ततो हीनक्रियादीनां या प्रजा सापि तच्छीला स्यात् । व्याधयश् च संक्रामन्ति । एवं हि वैद्यके पठ्यते- "सर्वे संक्रामिणो रोगा वर्जयित्वा प्रवाहिकाम्" ॥ ३.७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*That in which the sacred rites*’—the natal and other sacraments—‘*have
been abandoned*’—neglected; *i.e*., in which the consecratory rites as
also the compulsory ‘Five Sacrifices,’ etc., are not performed.

‘*Male-less*’—productive of females; *i.e*., in which, aṣa rule, only
female, not male, children are born;

‘*Devoid of the Veda*’—destitute of Vedic study.

‘*Romaśārśasam*’—This copulative compound mentions two kinds of
families. ‘*Romasha,’ ‘woolly*,’—*i.e*. the members of which have their
arms and limbs covered with much and long hair. ‘*Piles*’—fleshy
protuberances in the anus, which being a disease, are extremely painful.

‘*Phthisis*’—the disease of consumption.

‘*Dyspepsia*’—slow-digestion: by which the food eaten is not properly
digested.

‘*Epilepsy*’—leading to loss of memory and other cognate troubles.

‘*Leucoderma*’—white spots on the body, with holes.

‘*Leprosy*’—is well-known.

All these words—beginning with ‘*romasha*’—are names of particular
diseases, and are to be taken as ending in possessive affixes.

Older commentators have explained that the prohibition. herein contained
is based entirely upon ordinary visible considerations: As a matter of
fact, bipeds inherit the peculiarities of their mother’s families;
hence, children born of mothers belonging to families that have
‘abandoned the sacred rites,’ etc., etc, would be prone to the same
defects;

and diseases ace apt to be infectious; works on medicine having declared
that ‘all diseases, with the sole exception of’ Diarrhoea, are
infectious.’—(7)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 588), where
‘*hīnakriyam*’ is explained as ‘devoid of the performance of such acts
as the sacrifice and the like;’—‘*Niṣpuruṣam*’ as ‘that in which females
are the sole survivors—‘*niśchandaḥ*’ as ‘devoid of Vedic study;’—also
in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 477), which has exactly the same
explanation of precisely the same words.

*Aparārka* (p. 84) quotes this along with the preceding verse;—and adds
the following explanations:—‘*Hīnakriyam*’ means ‘devoid of the proper
performance of the Conception and other Sacramental
Rites,’—‘*Niṣpuruṣam*’ means ‘a family in which girls alone are
born,’—‘*Niśchandaḥ*’ is ‘devoid of Vedic study,’—‘*lomasham*’ is ‘that
members whereof have their body covered with inordinately prominent
hairs,’—and ‘*arshasam*’ means ‘suffering from piles.’—It is quoted in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 204) which adds the following
explanations:—‘*Hīnakriyam*,’ not engaged in the performance of
sacrifices and other religious acts;—‘*Niṣpuruṣam*,’ without a male
master—‘*Niśchandaḥ*’ devoid of Vedic learning—‘*romasham*,’
hairy,—‘*arshasam*’, suffering from the particular disease, piles,—all
these qualifications pertain to the children of the family;—and in
*Saṃskāra*-*ratnamālā* (p. 508), which has the following
notes;—‘*Hīnakriyam*’, not performing the prescribed duties, *i.e*., not
avoiding prohibited acts,—‘*Niṣpuruṣam*’, devoid of male
progeny,—‘*arshasam*’ family in which the disease runs hereditary.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 6-7)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.6].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

007	(Viz.) one which neglects the sacred rites, one in which no male children (are born), one in which the Veda is not studied, one (the members of) which have thick hair on the body, those which are subject to hemorrhoids, phthisis, weakness of digestion, epilepsy, or white or black leprosy.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/008_nodvahet_kapilAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>008 नोद्वहेत् कपिलाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

नोद्वहेत् कपिलां कन्यां  
नाऽधिकाङ्गीं न रोगिणीम् ।  
नाऽलोमिकां नाऽति-लोमां  
न वाचाटां न पिङ्गलाम् [मेधातिथिपाठः - वाचालां]  ॥ ३.८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/008_nodvahet_kapilAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He should hot marry a maiden with tawny hair, nor one with superfluous limbs, nor one who has disease, nor one who has either no hair or too much hair, nor one who is garrulous, nor one with reddish eyes.—(8)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वः कुलाश्रयः प्रतिषेधः । अयं तु स्वरूपाश्रयः । यस्या कद्रुवर्णाः[^४८] कनकवर्णा वा केशाः सा **कपिला** । **अधिकाङ्गी** षडङ्गुलिः । **रोगिणी** बहुरोगा दुष्प्रतिकारव्याधिगृहीता च । भूम्नीनिः[^४९] मत्वर्थीयो नित्ययोगे वा । **अलोमिका** अकेशा । लोमानि केशा अप्य् उच्यन्ते । बाहुमध्ये जङ्घाद्वये वा सर्वलोम्नाम् अभावः । **वाचाला** स्वल्प एव वक्तव्ये बहुलं परुषं च भाषते । **पिङ्गला** अक्षिरोगेण मण्डलाक्षी कपिलपिङ्गलाक्षी वा ॥ ३.८ ॥


[^४९]:
     M G: bhūmnīni


[^४८]:
     M G 1st ed.: asuvarṇāḥ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The prohibition in the preceding verse was with regard to the family of
the bride; while that in the present verse pertains to her body.

The girl whose hairs are of either tawny or golden colour is called
‘*kapilā*.’

‘*With superfluous limbs*’—*e.g*., having six fingers.

‘*Who has disease*’—who is suffering from many diseases, or is overtaken
by some incurable disease;—the possessive affix having the sense of
*many* or Of *permanence*.

‘*Who has no hair*’—‘*loman*’— standing for *hairs* in general also.
What the present qualification has in view, however, is the entire
absence of hair in the arm-pits and between the thighs.

‘*Garrulous*’—who talks much and disagreeably, when it is necessary to
speak very little.

‘*With reddish eyes*’—Whose eyes are red, on account of some
disease.—(8)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 731) in support of
the view that one should not many a girl with defects;—it explains
‘*vācāṭā*’ as ‘garrulous’ and ‘*piṅgalā*’ as ‘with reddish eyes.’

*Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 149) quotes it and adds that the defects here
described do not deprive the girl, if married, of the character of the
‘lawful wife,’ as visible (physical) defects can mean only physical
disabilties, and cannot affect the nonphysical spiritual or moral
character of anything.

The verse is quoted also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Lakṣaṇa, p. 120), where
‘*rogiṇī*’ is explained as ‘suffering from epilepsy and such diseases,’
and ‘*vācāṭām*’ ‘as one who talks much of improper things,’—and not
simply as ‘garrulous’, which is the explanation of the same author in
another place \[Saṃskāra-prakāśa, p. 731, see first note above\];—also
in *Aparārka* (p. 78) to the effect that one should not many a girl who
is not endowed with the proper marks;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 74);—in
*Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 510), which explains ‘*kapilām*’, as ‘of the
colour of red lice,’ and ‘*piṅgalā*’ as ‘of the colour of fire:’—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 200), which explains ‘*vācāṭā*’ as
‘garrulous,’ and *piṅgalā*’ as ‘with tawny eyes;’—and in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 50a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.8-9)**

*Viṣṇu* (24.12-16).Not one who is diseased or with excessive limbs; or
with deficient limbs; nor one who is too pale, or too talkative.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1. 3).—‘One who is free from disease and has a brother.’

*Laghu-Śātātapa* (34).—\[Reproduces Manu.\]

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 731).—‘Too hort (short?), too tall,
too thin, too fat, with tawny eyes, too pale,—such girls should not he
accepted.’

*Viṣṇu-purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 731).—‘The wise man shall not
marry a girl who hears signs of a beard, who has a masculine appearance,
whose voice is cracked, who speaks insinuatingly, whose voice is like
the crow’s, who looks on without, winking, whose eyes arc defective;—he
shall not marry her whose thighs arc hairy, whose ankles are high, in
whose, cheeks there are dimples;—he shall, not marry a girl whose skin
is rough, who is pale, who is diseased, or with red eyes, or with lean
hands and feet,—or one who is dwarfish, or too tall, or one whose
eye-brows arc joined: nor one whose teeth have many holes, nor one with
a frightful face.’

*Āpastamba* (Vīramitrodaya-Sarṃskāra, p. 532).—‘One named after an
asterism, or after a river, or after a tree is not commended; one should
avoid one whose name contains the consonants *r* or *l* or *gh* or *jh*
or *ḍh* or *ḍh* or *bh*.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Satṃskāra)—‘In selecting a wife one should avoid
one named after a Veda, or a river, or a mountain or a Gandharva, or an
asterism, or a tree, or a creeper.’
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

008	Let him not marry a maiden (with) reddish (hair), nor one who has a redundant member, nor one who is sickly, nor one either with no hair (on the body) or too much, nor one who is garrulous or has red (eyes),
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/009_narxa-vRxa-nadI-nAmnIn_nA-ntya-parvata-nAmikAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>009 नर्क्ष-वृक्ष-नदी-नाम्नीन् नाऽन्त्य-पर्वत-नामिकाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

नर्क्ष-वृक्ष-नदी-नाम्नीं  
नाऽन्त्य-पर्वत-नामिकाम् ।  
न पक्ष्य्-अहि-प्रेष्य-नाम्नीं  
न च भीषण-नामिकाम्  ॥ ३.९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/009_narxa-vRxa-nadI-nAmnIn_nA-ntya-parvata-nAmikAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Nor one bearing the name of an asterism, or a tree, or a river; nob one having her hame after a low caste or a mountain; nor one named after a bird, a serpent or a slave; nor one with a hame inspiring terror.—(9)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**ऋक्षं** नक्षत्रम्, तन्नामिका, आर्द्रा ज्येष्ठा इत्यादि । **वृक्षनाम्नीं** शिंशपा आमलकीति । **नदी** गङ्गा यमुना, तन्नाम्नी । ऋक्षाणि च वृक्षाश् च नद्यश् चेति द्वन्द्वः तासां नामानीति षष्ठीसमासः । ततो द्वितीयेन नामशब्देनोत्तरपदलोपी समासः । **अन्त्यनामिका** बर्बरीशबरीत्यादि । **पर्वता** विन्ध्यमलयादयः । पूर्ववत् समासात्मकप्रत्ययः । **पक्षिनाम्नी** शुकी सारिका । **अहिः** सर्पस् तन्नाम्नी- व्याली भुजङ्गी । **प्रेष्या** दासी चेटी दरनी[^५०] । **बिभिषणं** नाम भयजनकम्, डाकिनी राक्षसी ॥ ३.९ ॥


[^५०]:
     M G: vālī
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Asterism*’ is constellation; one who bears the name of one of these;
such as ‘*Ārdrā*,’ ‘*Jyeṣṭhā*,’ and the like.

‘*Bearing the name of a tree*’—such as ‘Śiṃśapā,’ ‘*Āmalakī*,’ and so
forth.

‘*River*’—the Gaṅgā and the Yamunā; she who bears these names.

The term “*ṛkṣavṛkṣanadī*” is to be expounded as a copulative compound;
which with the following term ‘*nāman*’ forms a genitive *Tatpuruṣa*
compound; and these, along with the term ‘nāman’ repeated, form a
*Bahuvrīhi* compound; the repeated term ‘*nāman*’ being dropped.

‘*Having her name after a low caste*’— such as ‘*Barbarī*’

‘*Śabarī*’ and the like.

‘*Mountains*’— such as the Vindhyā, the Himalaya, and the rest.

This compound (‘*parvatanāmikām*’) also is to be expounded as the
former; and has the ‘*ka*’ affix added to it.

‘*Named after a bird*’— snch as ‘*Śukī*’ ‘*Sārikā*,’ and the like.

‘*Serpent*,’ snake; one who is named after it; such as ‘*Vyālī*,’
‘*Bhujaṅgī*.’

‘*Slave*’— such names as ‘*Dāsī*,’ ‘*Bālī*.’

‘*Inspiring terror*’—that which causes fear; such as *Ḍākinī*,’
‘*Rākṣasī*.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 732), where
‘*ṛkṣa*’ is explained as ‘asterism;’—and ‘*antya*’ as ‘*mleccha*;’—in
*Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 149) to the same effect as the preceding
verse;’—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Lakṣaṇa, p. 120), where ‘*antya*’ is
explained as ‘*antyaja*,’ *i.e*., *cāṇḍāla*;—in *Aparārka* (p. 78) as
indicating the unmarriageability of girls with the wrong type of
names;—in *Samkāramayūkha* (p. 74);—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 510),
which explains ‘*antya*’ as bearing a Mleccha name;—in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 201), which explains ‘*ṛkṣa*’ as ‘*nakṣatra*,’ ‘*antya*’
as ‘*mleccha*,’ and ‘*bhīṣaṇā*’ as terrifying;—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 50a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.8-9)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.8].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

009	Nor one named after a constellation, a tree, or a river, nor one bearing the name of a low caste, or of a mountain, nor one named after a bird, a snake, or a slave, nor one whose name inspires terror.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/010_avyangAngIM_saumya-nAmnIm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>010 अव्यङ्गाङ्गीं सौम्य-नाम्नीम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अव्यङ्गाङ्गीं सौम्य-नाम्नीं  
हंस-वारण-गामिनीम् ।  
तनुलोम-केश-दशनां  
मृद्व्-अङ्गीम् उद्वहेत् स्त्रियम्  ॥ ३.१० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/010_avyangAngIM_saumya-nAmnIm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One should marry a female with a faultless body, bearing an agreeable name, having her gait like that of the swan or the elephant, having fine hair on the body and the head, and fine teeth, and with tender limbs.—(10)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अव्यङ्गाङ्गीं**[^५१] ।** **अव्यङ्गान्य् अङ्गानि यस्या सैवम् उच्यते । अव्यङ्गशब्दो ऽवैकल्यवचनः, प्रवीणोदारादिशब्दवद् यद्य् अपि[^५२] व्युत्पाद्यते ऽविकलान्य् अङ्गानि यस्येति, अतश् चाङ्गशब्दस्य द्वितीयस्यावयविनि शक्तौचित्येन, संस्थानस्य परिपूर्णता साव्यङ्गशब्देनोच्यते । **सौम्यं** मधुरं **नाम** । "स्त्रीणां सुखोद्यम्" (म्ध् २.३३) अत्र दर्शितम् । **हंस** इव **वारण** इव गच्छति । यादृशी हंसानां हस्तिनां च विलासवती मन्थरा गतिर् यस्याः । **तनु**शब्दो नाल्पवचनः किं तर्ह्य् आनुपरिमाणे[^५३] वर्तते । तन्वङ्गी सोच्यते या[^५४] नातिस्थूला नातिकृशेति । **मृदूनि** सुस्पर्षाकठिनापरुषाण्य् अङ्गानि यस्याः सा । ताम् **उद्वहेत् स्त्रियं** कन्याधिकारात् कन्याम् । 


[^५४]:
     M G 1st ed omit: yā; G 2nd ed.: sā


[^५३]:
     M G 1st ed.: ānuparibhāve


[^५२]:
     M G: yady api


[^५१]:
     M G omit: avyaṅgāṅgīṃ

- <u>यद्य् एवं</u> नालोमिकाम् इत्यादिप्रतिषेधो ऽनर्थको ऽस्माद् एव विधानात् या नैवंरूपा तस्या अविवाह्यता सिद्धा । 

- <u>सत्यम्</u> एवम् । एक एवार्थो द्वाभ्यां विधिमुखेन प्रतिषेधमुखेन चोद्यमानस् तु स्पष्टो बुध्यते । 

- कन्याशब्दश् चात्र प्रकरणाद् अननुभूतसंभोगासु स्त्रीषु प्रवर्तते । तथा च वसिष्ठः- "अस्पृष्टमैथुनां सदृशीं भार्यां विन्देत" (वध् ८.१) इति । न चान्येन संस्कृतान्येन पुनः संस्कर्तुं शक्या, कृतस्य करणाभावात् । अतश् चोढाया अप्रवृत्तभर्तृसंयोगायाः कथंचित् स्वैरिणीत्वे भर्तृप्रवासादिना नान्येन विवाहो ऽस्ति सत्य् अपि कन्यात्वे । तथा चेदृशी वसिष्ठोक्तिर् मध्ये पठिता । अन्यत्राप्य् उक्तम्- "अनन्यपूर्वां यवीयसीं भ्रातृमतीं स्त्रियम् उद्वहेत" इति (च्ड़्। य्ध् १.५२) ॥ ३.१० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

One whose body is free from defects is called ‘*avyaṅgāṅgī*;’ the term
‘*avyaṇga*’ standing for *freedom from defects*; just like such other
words as ‘*pravīṇa*,’ ‘*udāra*,’ and the rest. Since the term
‘*avyaṅga*,’ etymologically, means ‘free from defects in the limbs,’ the
second ‘*aṇga*’ must be taken as standing for the *whole body*; hence
the epithet ‘*avyatiya*’ denotes *fulness or comeliness of the bodily
form*.

‘*Saumya*,’ ‘agreeable’—it has been laid down in this book that the
names of women should be sweet-sounding and easy to pronounce.

She who moves like the swan or the elephant. That is, one whose gait is
as elegant and languid as that of the swan or the elephant.

The term ‘*tanu*,’ ‘*fine*,’ here does not stand for ‘*small*;’ it means
moderate. Just as the girl who is neither fat nor leau is called
‘*tanvaṅgī*,’ ‘one with a fine body.’

‘*Mṛdvaṇgī* is one whose limbs are *tender*, not hard or rough.

Such a female ‘*one should marry*.’ ‘*Female*’ here must be taken to
stand for the *maiden*, as it is the maiden that is being spoken of in
the context.

“If that is so (if this verse also refers to the *maiden*), then the
prohibition contained in verse 8 regarding ‘one who has no hair, &c.,’
is superfluous; as the positive injunction, contained in the present
verse, implies that ‘one who is not as here described should not be
married.’”

True, that is so; the same fact when stated by means of two
verses—affirmatively in one and negatively in the other—becomes clearly
understood.

In the present context, the term ‘maiden’ is used in the sense of a
woman who has not experienced sexual intercourse. Says Vaśiṣṭha—‘One
should acquire a wife who has had no sexual intercourse and who is
similar to himself.’ But one who has been ‘consecrated’ (by marriage) by
one man is no longer capable of being ‘consecrated’ by another; as there
can be no doing of what has been already done. So that, if a girl has
been married, and her husband goes away before she has had intercourse
with him,—if she happens to be a loose woman, she cannot be married to
another person, even though she is still a ‘*maiden*’ (in the technical
sense); and it is such a maiden that is mentioned in the words of
Vaśiṣṭha quoted above. In another work also it is said—‘One should marry
a female, never before married by another person, who is younger than
himself and has brothers’ (Yājñavalkya, *Ācāra* 52).—(10)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 731) as setting
forth the external signs of a marriageable girl;—also in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Lakṣaṇa, p. 118) to the same effect;—and in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 132)
as setting forth the external signs; and for the *internal* signs it
refers to Āśvalāyana who has prescribed the following method;—eight
balls should be made of clay brought from eight different places, and
after some incantations have been uttered over them, the girl should be
asked to pick up one of them; (1) if she picks up that made of clay from
fields with rich corn growing, it is a sign that she would have progeny
rich in grains; (2) if she picks up that of clay brought from the
cattle-shed, she will be rich in cattle; (3) if that of clay from the
altar, she will be an expounder of Brahman;—(4) if that of clay from a
lake that is never dry, she will be endowed with all riches; (5) if that
from the gambling den, she will be crafty;—(6) if that from the
road-crossing, she will be inclined to wander about; (7) if that from
barren soil, she will be unlucky; (8) and if that from the crematoriuûi,
she will destroy her husband.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 78);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 74)
as laying down the external signs of a marriageable girl;—in
*Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 509) which explains ‘*tanulomakeśadaśanā*’ as
‘one the hair on whose chest is scanty, and whose hair and teeth are
fine’;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 200);—and in *Nṛsiṃha-prasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 50a).

‘*Putrikādharmaśaṅkayā*’—‘For fear of her having the character of the
Appointed Daughter’ (Medhātithi);—‘For fear (in the former case) of her
being an Appointed Daughter, and (in the latter) of committing a sin’
(Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa, Rāghavānanda, and ‘others’ in Medhātithi).
Govindarāja adopts Medhātithi’s explanation so far as this phrase is
concerned; but he gives a somewhat different explanation of the first
half of the verse, which according to him, would mean ‘one should not
marry a girl who has no brother, *or* whose father is not known’,—the
two contingencies being independent; while according to Medhātithi, the
second clause (‘whose father is not known’) is subordinate to the
former,—the meaning being that the doubt regarding the girl being an
‘appointed daughter’ would arise if there were no brother, *and* if the
father were not known; for he adds “if the father is known, there is no
fear of the girl being an Appointed Daughter, as he will himself declare
whether or not she has been ‘appointed’.”

According to Medhātithi, therefore, in the translation of the verse, we
should have ‘and’ instead of ‘*or*’.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 474), which adds
the following notes:—He shall not many a girl with regard to whom it is
not known whether or not her father has the intention of making her an
‘appointed daughter;’—the sense is that where there is no fear of this,
one may marry the girl, even though she has no brother. The clause ‘*na
vijñāyeta vā pitā*’ (which, according to this explanation, means ‘*the
intentions* of whose father are not known’) implies that it is possible
for the daughter to be ‘appointed’ even without the Father making an
agreement to that effect with the bridegroom;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p.
82), which adds that this implies that the daughter can be ‘appointed,’
even without express agreement and declaration.

The verse is quoted also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 746), where it
is explained as meaning that ‘one should not marry a girl with regard to
whose father it is not known whether or not he has the intention of
making her an Appointed Daughter’; and it adds that it is shown by this
that according to all the sages a daughter can become ‘appointed’ even
without being openly declared to be so;—and in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p.
414), which explains the meaning to be that one should not marry the
girl with regard to whom it is not known if her father intends to
‘appoint’ her; and adds the same note as *Saṃskāramayūkha*.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 136) quotes this verse and reproduces the same
explanation as above, and deduces the conclusion that ‘one should marry
the girl in whose case there is no fear of this.’

*Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 699) quotes the verse and adds that ‘in a case
where there is no fear of the father having an intention of making the
girl an Appointed Daughter, one may marry the girl, even though she may
have no brother.’

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 80) as indicating that it is
possible for a daughter to be ‘appointed’ secretly; without her being
married under that expressed agreement;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra
p. 181), which adds the same note as *Saṃskāraratnamālā*.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Laghu-Āśvalāyana* (15. 2).—‘After due examination, ho shall select a
girl who is horn of a good family, has a pleasing face, nice limbs, nice
clothes and of agreeable looks, who has beautiful eyes and is handsome.’

*Śātātapa*. (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 731).—‘One shall select a girl
who has the voice of the swan, complexion like the clouds and eyes of
the tawny colour of honey.’

*Āpastamba* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra).—‘One shall marry a girl who has
relations, good character, and auspicious marks, and who is free from
disease.’
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

010	Let him wed a female free from bodily defects, who has an agreeable name, the (graceful) gait of a Hamsa or of an elephant, a moderate (quantity of) hair on the body and on the head, small teeth, and soft limbs.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/011_yasyAs_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>011 यस्यास् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यस्यास् तु न भवेद् भ्राता  
न विज्ञायेत वा पिता [मेधातिथिपाठः - वै(वा पिता] ।  
नोपयच्छेत तां प्राज्ञः  
पुत्रिकाधर्मशङ्कया  ॥ ३.११ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/011_yasyAs_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The wise man shall not mabry one who has no brother, or whose father is not known; for fear of her having the character of the “appointed daughter.”—(11)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यस्या भ्राता नास्ति तां न विवहेत् । **पुत्रिकाधर्मशङ्कया** पुत्रिकात्वशङ्कया । पुत्रिकाधर्मः कदाचिद् अस्याः कृतो भवेत् पित्रेत्य् अनया शङ्कया अनेन संदेहेन । 

- कथं चेयं शङ्का भवति ।

- **यदि न विज्ञायेत पिता**, देशान्तरे प्रोषितो मृतो वा । सा च मात्रा पितृसपिण्डैर् वा दीयते । प्राप्तकाला पितर्य् असंनिहित एतैर् अपि दातव्येति स्मर्यते । स्मृतिं चोत्तरत्र दर्शयिष्यामः । पितरि तु संविज्ञयमाने नास्ति पुत्रिकात्वशङ्का । स हि स्वयम् एवाह "कृता वा न कृता वा" इति । **वा**शब्दश् चेच् छब्दार्थे द्रष्टव्यः । यदि पिता न विज्ञायेत तदा कन्यका न वोढव्या । 

- <u>अन्ये</u> तु स्वतन्त्रम् एतत् प्रतिषेधद्वयम् आचक्षते । यदि[^५५] **पिता न विज्ञायेत,**[^५६] अननेयं जातेति, गूढोत्पन्नायाः प्रतिषेधः । एवं च संबन्धः । **यस्या भ्राता नास्ति** तां पुत्रिकात्वशङ्कया **नोपयच्छेत** । **न विज्ञायेत**[^५७] इत्य् अत्र पुत्रिकाशङ्कयेत्य् एतन् न संबध्यते । 


[^५७]:
     M G: vijñāyata


[^५६]:
     M G: vijñāyate


[^५५]:
     M G: yady api

- अस्मिन् प्रकरणे यत्र नास्ति दृष्टगतः प्रतिषेधः यथा "असपिण्डा च" (म्ध् ३.५) इत्य् अत्र श्लोके, तदतिक्रमे विवाहस्वरूपानिर्वृत्तिर् एव । अतः सगोत्रादिविवाहः कृतो ऽप्य् अकृत एव । विध्यवगमरूपत्वाद् आधानवद् विवाहस्य विध्यतिक्रमरूपाद् अपगमात्[^५८] । यथाधानविधौ यत् किंचिद् अङ्गं न ज्ञातं तदभावे नाहवनीयादिनिवृत्तिः, एवं सगोत्रादिकाया[^५९] न भार्यात्वम् । तस्मात् त्याज्यैव कृततादृशसंस्कारप्रतिरूपिकापि[^६०] । तत्रभवन्तो वसिष्ठादयः प्रायश्चित्तम् अपि स्मरन्ति तादृशविवाहे । यद्य् अपि कर्मण एव तदङ्गप्रतिषेधातिक्रमे वैगुण्यम्, न साक्षात् पुरुषस्य दोषः, तथापि वाचनिकं प्रायश्चित्तम् । अथ वा सगोत्रागमनं निषिद्धम् । तदर्थे व्यापारे प्रवर्तमाने यद् उक्तं तत् प्रायश्चित्तं भवेत् । 


[^६०]:
     M G 1st ed.: kṛtā tādṛśa-


[^५९]:
     M G: asagotrādikāyā


[^५८]:
     M G: avagamāt

- यस् तु हीनक्रियादिप्रतिषेधस् तस्य दृष्टदर्शनमूलत्वान् निर्वर्तते विवाहः, भवत्य् असौ भार्या, नास्ति तस्यास् त्यागः । एवमर्थ एव "महन्त्य् अपि" (म्ध् ३.६) इति पूर्वस्मात् प्रतिषेधाद् भेदः स्तवनार्थं पठितः । एवम् एव च शिष्टसमाचारः । कदाचित् कपिलादिरूपां उपयच्छति न सगोत्राम् ॥ ३.११ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

She who has no brother,—such a girl one should not marry,—‘*for fear of
her having, the character of the appointed daughter*;’ *i.e*., by reason
of her being an ‘appointed daughter;’ *i.e*., by reason of there being
the doubt that the girl’s father might have performed those rites that
would have made her an ‘appointed daughter.’

“Why should such a doubt arise at all?”

Such a doubt would arise if the girl’s father is not known, having died
or having gone away to a foreign country. Under such circumstances, the
girl is given away in marriage either by her mother or by other members
of her father’s family. Since it is laid down that when the girl has
reached the marriageable age, if her father happen to be absent, she
shall be given away in marriage by the said relations.’ The exact rule
on this point we shall quote later on. If the father is known, however,
there is no fear of the girl being an ‘appointed daughter as he will
himself declare whether or not she has been ‘appointed.’

‘*Or*’ in the text should be taken in the sense of ‘if;’ the sense being
that ‘if the father is not known, the girl should not be married.’

Others have taken the two clauses as formulating two independent
prohibitions: (a) ‘If the father is not known’—*i.e*., if it is not
known from whom she is born; this being a prohibition of marrying the
girl of unknown parentage;—and (*b*) the next prohibition is to be
construed as ‘one should not marry the girl who has no brother, for fear
of her being an appointed daughter.’ They further point out that the
latter phrase, ‘for fear of her being an appointed daughter,’ cannot be
construed with the clause, ‘if her father is not known.’

In the whole of this section on Marriage, wherever the prohibition is
not based upon grounds that are not perceptible—*e.g*., ‘one should
marry a maiden who is not his father’s *sapiṇḍa*,’ etc., (when the
grounds of interdiction are trascendental, not perceptible, as in the
case of the prohibition of marriage with a diseased girl, etc.),—if the
prohibition is disobeyed, the ‘marriage’ itself remains unaccomplished.
Hence, if one happens to marry a girl belonging to the same *gotra* as
himself, the marriage, even though performed, would be as good as *not
performed*; and this for the simple reason that the character of
‘marriage’ is determined by scriptural injunction,—just like the
character of the ‘Fire-laying’ rite; and, hence, a transgression of the
injunction means the non-accomplishment of -the Rite. In the case of
Fire-laying, it is found that if there is omission of any subsidiary
detail, the *Āhavanīya*’ and other ‘Fires’ are not accomplished;
similarly, a girl that belongs to the same ‘*gotra*’ as a man can never
become the ‘wife’ of that man. Hence it has been ordained that such a
girl, even though she may have gone through the sacramental rites, shall
be given up. Further, in connection with such marriages, Vaśiṣṭha and
other revered writers have prescribed specie lexpiratory rites. Even
though, in reality, what each a marriage involves is only a discrepancy
in the Rite caused by the transgression of one of the interdictions
relating to a subsidiary detail,—and it does not involve any sin on the
part of the man,—yet the Expiratory Rite has to be performed, in view of
its being directly enjoined by the scriptures. Or, we may take it thus
that what is prohibited is ‘intercourse’ with a girl of the same
‘*gotra*,’ and the Expiatory Rite relates to the series of acts
perpetrated by the man (in the form of the marriage-ceremonies.)

As regards the prohibition of marriage with girls belonging to families
that may have dropped the sacred rites and so forth,—it is based upon
perceptible grounds; and, hence, when such girls are married, the
‘marriage’ is duly accomplished, the girl actually becomes the man’s
‘wife,’ and she shall not be given up. It is in view of this fact that
in verse 6, we have the laudatory epithet ‘even though they be great,’
which draws a line of distinction between the two sets of prohibitions.
Such also is the custom among all cultured people: they do occasionally
marry girls ‘with tawny hair,’ etc., but never one that belongs to the
same gotra.—(11)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 474).—‘According to some people the
daughter becomes *appointed* by the mere intention of the father (to
that effect); hence as there could always be a suspicion regarding this,
one should not marry a girl who has no brother.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.53).—‘One who has a brother and is free from disease,
etc.’

*Laghu-Śātātapa* (36).—\[Reproduces Manu\],

*Likhita* (51)—\[Reproduces Manu\].

*Āśvalāyana* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 531).—‘One shall marry a girl
who has her father, mother and brother and is endowed with all suitable
qualities, etc., etc.’
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

011	But a prudent man should not marry (a maiden) who has no brother, nor one whose father is not known, through fear lest (in the former case she be made) an appointed daughter (and in the latter) lest (he should commit) sin.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/012_savarNAgre_dvijAtInAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>012 सवर्णाग्रे द्विजातीनाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सवर्णाग्रे द्विजातीनां  
प्रशस्ता दारकर्मणि ।  
कामतस् तु प्रवृत्तानाम्  
इमाः स्युः क्रमशो ऽवराः  ॥ ३.१२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/012_savarNAgre_dvijAtInAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For ‘twice-born men’ a girl of equal caste has been recommended for the first marriage-sacrament. For those, however, who take to it through mere desire, these (following) should be regarded as preferable in due order.—(12)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"उद्वहेत द्विजो भार्याम्" (म्ध् ३.४) इति सत्य् अपि द्वितीयानिर्देशे भार्यायाः प्रधानत्वे गुणकर्मत्वे च[^६१] विवाहस्य विवक्षितम् एकत्वम्, अनुवादगतोद्देश्यत्वात्, यथा यूपं छिनत्तीति । यस्यान्यतः स्वरूपम् अवगतं तस्यान्यत्र कार्यान्तरविधानार्थम् अनूद्यमानस्य यथावगतस्वरूपस्यैवानुवादो भवति, यथा गृहं संमार्ष्टीति, पूर्वावगतिसापेक्षत्वाद् अनुवादस्य । निर्ज्ञातसंख्याका हि ग्रहा, "दश एतान् अध्वर्युः प्रातःसवने ग्रहान् गृह्णाति" इत्यादिवाक्यैः, कार्यं चवगतं ग्रहैर् जुहोतीति । अतो ऽवगत्यन्तरापेक्षत्वाद् ग्रहशब्दस्य न विवक्ष्यते संख्या । इह तु भार्यालक्षणो ऽर्थो नान्यतः सिद्धो ऽस्माद् एव वाक्याद् अवगन्तव्यो ऽतो यथाश्रुति प्रतीयते, प्रातिपदिकार्थवत् संख्यापि विवक्षितेति । पञ्चमे चैतद् विस्तरतस् तर्केण वक्ष्यते । 


[^६१]:
     M G 1st ed.: ca guṇakarmatve

- स्थितायां संख्याविवक्षायां द्वितीयस्याः कृते ऽपि पाणिग्रहणे न भार्यात्वम् । यथा सत्य् आवहनीये न द्वितीय आहवनीयः । इष्यते च क्वचिन् निमित्ते भार्यान्तरपरिग्रहस् तदर्थम् इदम् आरभ्यते । एतद् एवाभिप्रेत्य गौतमीये पठितम्- "धर्मप्रजासंपन्ने दारे नान्यां कुर्वीत, अन्यतरापाये तु कुर्वीत" (=आप्ध् २.११.१२) इति ।

- **सवर्णा** समानजातीया । सा तावद् **अग्रे** प्रथमतो ऽकृतविजातीयदारपरिग्रहस्य[^६२] **प्रशस्ता** । कृते सवर्णाविवाहे यदि तस्यां कथंचित् प्रीतिर् न भवति, अथ वापत्त्यार्थो[^६३] व्यापारो न निष्पद्यते तदा कामहेतुकायां प्रवृत्ताव् इमा वक्ष्यमाणाः सवर्णावराः श्रेष्ठाः शास्त्रात् तु ज्ञातव्याः । अत एकत्वस्य सवर्णानियमस्य चायम् अपवादः ।


[^६३]:
     M G 1st ed.: kṛtāvapattyārtho


[^६२]:
     M G 1st ed.: prathamataḥ kṛta-

- <u>ननु</u> च सवर्णाविवाहे पारतन्त्र्यं प्रतीयते । न सवर्णाया बहुत्वं ।

- <u>एकत्वसंख्यातिक्रमस्</u> तावत् प्रतीयते । असवर्णाभ्यनुज्ञानेनाप्य् अतिक्रान्तं चेत् कः सवर्णाया निषेधकः । तथा गौतमेनाविशेषेणैव पठितम्- "अन्यतरापाये तु कुर्वीत" ( = आप्ध् २.११.१२) इति । उत्तरश्लोके "सा च स्वा च" इति सवर्णाविवाहो ऽस्ति ॥ ३.१२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In verse 4, we had the words ‘the twice-born person should take a wife,’
where the *wife* has been spoken of by means of a word ending in the
Accusative, which makes the *wife* th e *primary*, and the *marriage*
the *secondary*, object; and yet the singular number (in ‘wife’) is
meant to be duly significant; since it forms part of the predicate of
the sentence; just as we have in the case of the assertion, ‘he cuts the
*sacrificial post*.’ In the case of a thing whose character is
determined and known from other sources,—if such a thing happens to be
referred to in connection with the Injunction of some other act, it is
always understood to be referred to exactly in the form in which it has
been known; *e.g*., in the case of the injunction, ‘wash the cup;’ and
this for the simple reason that all ‘references’ are based upon wḥat is
previously known. Thus, in connection with the ‘cups,’ their *number* is
already known from such statements as ‘at the morning-extraction the
Adhvaryu takes up *ten* cups;’ their use also is already known from the
statement, ‘libations are poured with the cups;’ hence, in the
subsequent statement, ‘wash the *cup*,’ no significance is attached to
the singular number in the word ‘cup,’—this statementbeing construed in
connection with what is already known about it. In the present instance,
on the other hand, the thing concerned—the ‘wife’—is one whose character
has not been determined anywhere else; in fact, it is only from the
present text that we derive our knowledge of what the ‘wife’ is: hence,
we understand it exactly as it is here described; so that due
significance is to be attached to the number, just as much as to the
basic noun itself. All this we shall discuss with detailed arguments
under discourse V.

Thus then, due significance being attached to the (singular) number (in
the word ‘wife,’ as used in verse 4),—if one happens to marry a second
time, even though the marriage-rites might be duly performed, she does
not become a ‘wife;’ just as when one *Āhavanīya* is already there, the
second fire, even though duly kindled, does not become ‘*Āhavanīya*.’
But, under certain circumstances, the taking of a second wife is
considered desirable; and it is in connection with this second marriage
that we have the rules propounded in this and the following verses. It
is in view of this that Gautama has said—‘If one’s wife is endowed with
virtue and offspring, one should not take another; in the event of
failure on either of the two points, one may have another.’

‘*Of equal caste*,’—*i.e*., of the same caste.

‘*For the first*,’—first of all; *i.e*., for one who has not taken a
wife from a different caste; ‘*has been recommended*.’

Having married a girl of his own caste, if the man finds that she does
not inspire his love; or if the act of child-begetting is not
fulfilled,—then there comes about the man’s desire for another wife; and
then *these*—going to be mentioned below—‘*are to be regarded as
preferable*’— superior—on the strength of the scriptures.

This, then, is an exception to the rule regarding having only *one*
wife, as also to that of having a wife from one’s own caste.

*Objection*:— “The restriction appears to be upon the taking of a second
wife from one’s own caste; as the plurality (of wives) does not appear
to be sanctioned regarding girls of one’s own caste.”

*Answer*—All that the present text permits is the exceeding of the
number ‘one.’ And, if what is sanctioned is the exceeding of it by means
of marrying a girl of a different caste,—what is there that would
prevent one’s marrying (again) a second girl of his own caste? It is for
this reason that what Gautama has declared applies equally to all—‘if
there is failure in regard to either of the two, one may take another
wife.’ In the following verse also we read, ‘she and *one of his own
caste*,’ where also the second wife from one’s own caste is
permitted.—(12).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted by Jīmūtavāhana (Dāyabhāga, p. 209);—and in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 143) as providing permissible substitutes for the
proper ‘wife’;—it explains ‘*avarāḥ*’ (which it reads in place of
‘*varāḥ*’) as *jaghanyāḥ*, ‘lower’;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 98), which
adds the following notes:—There are three classes of Marriage—(1) for
Dharma, (2) for offispring and (3) for physical pleasure; that for
offspring is obligatory, and for this one should have a girl of the same
caste as himself; and in that for Pleasure, or for avoiding the sin of
not entering the second life-stage, one may have girls of other castes,
even a Śūdra girl; in the former also, if no girl of the same caste is
available, girls of other castes may be taken.

The first half of the verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p.
747), which adds the following explanations:—The term ‘*varṇa*’ stands
for *caste*;—‘*agre*’ means *the first marriage*;—the term ‘*dvijāti*’
indicates also persons born of the Śūdra through mixed marriages,
‘natural’ as well as ‘inverse—‘*praśastā*’ means that she is recommended
as the first and best alternative for taking a wife for the purposes of
(1) enjoyment, (2) begetting a son and (3) helping in religious acts
(these three being ‘*dārakarma*’ the *function of the wife*).

This is quoted also in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 493), where we have
the following notes:—‘*Agre*’ means ‘at the first marriage of the
Accomplished Student.’;—‘*dārakarmaṇi*’—for the performance of the
Agnihotra and other rites;—‘*Savarṇā*’—‘she who has the same caste as
the bridegroom’ is recommended;—*i.e*., the Brāhmaṇī for the Brāhmaṇa,
the Kṣatriyā for the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya for the Vaiśya. Having, for
the sake of religious acts, married a girl of the same caste, if one is
desirous of ha ving more wives for purposes of physical enjoyment, he
may marry girls of lower castes (‘*avarāḥ*’) in due order;—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 205), which says that the implication of
the text is that after one has married a girl of the same caste, he may
marry others of other castes also, but they will be less and less
desirable in order; this means that for the sake of Dharma one should
marry a girl of the same caste.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.12-13)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (1. 8. 2-5)—‘For the Brāhmaṇa there are four wives, in the
order of the castes; for the Kṣatriya, there are three; for the Vaiśya,
two; for the Śūdra, one.’

*Viṣṇu* (21. 1-1).—\[Same as above.\]

*Viṣṇu* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 191).—‘For the twice-born, the Śūdra wife
can serve no spiritual purpose; the only purpose she can serve is that
of lust and hence she has been permitted only for one who is blinded by
lust.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1. 57).—‘In the order of ṭhe castes, there are three
wives for the Brāhmaṇa, two for the Kṣatriya and for tho Vaiśya; for the
Śūdra, there is only the wife of the same caste.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1. 24-25).—‘In the order of the castes, there are three
wives for the Brāhmaṇa, two for the Kṣatriya, one each for the Vaiśya
and the Śūdra;—according to some people, the Shíidra girl may also he
married, but without mantras.’

*Pāraśara* (1.4. 8-1.1).—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, there are three wives, in
the order of the castes;—two for the Kṣatriya;—one for the Vaiśya;—for
all, the Śūdra wife also, hut without mantras.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 747,).—‘For all men the first
alternative is to have a wife of the same caste as oneself.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 748).—‘In the order of the castes,
the Brāhmaṇa may have four wives; the Kṣatriya, three; the Vaiśya, two;
the Śūdra, only one, the Śūdra.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 748).—‘In the event of his not
obtaining a girl of the same caste as himself, the Brāhmaṇa may beget, a
son on a Kṣatriya wife, or on a Vaiśya wife, or according to some, on a
Śūdra wife.’

*Nārada* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 748).—‘Apart from the Brāhmaṇa
wife, there are three wives, in the descending order of the castes; for
the Śūdra girl, there are (apart from the Śūdra husband), three husbands
in the ascending order of the castes; for the Kṣatriya there are two
wives, in addition to the one of his own caste; for the Vaiśya only one;
for the Vaiśya girl there are two husbands and for the Kṣatriya, one
only—in addition to that of her own caste.’
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

012	For the first marriage of twice-born men (wives) of equal caste are recommended; but for those who through desire proceed (to marry again) the following females, (chosen) according to the (direct) order (of the castes), are most approved.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/013_shUdraiva_bhAryA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>013 शूद्रैव भार्या ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

शूद्रैव भार्या शूद्रस्य  
सा च स्वा च विशः स्मृते ।  
ते च स्वा चैव राज्ञश् च  
ताश् च स्वा चाऽग्र-जन्मनः  ॥ ३.१३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/013_shUdraiva_bhAryA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For the Śūdra, the Śūdra girl. alone has been ordained to be the wife; for the Vaiśya, she as also the girl of his own caste; for the Kṣatriya, those two as also the girl of his own caste; and for the Brāhmaṇa those three as also the girl of his own caste—(13).
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वर्णभेदे सति सवर्णानियमः । यथैव ब्राह्मणस्य क्षत्रियादिस् त्रयो भवन्ति एवं **शूद्रस्य** जातिन्यूना रजकतक्षकादिस्त्रियः प्राप्ताः । अतः सवर्णेयम् उच्यते । उत्कृष्टजातीया तु पूर्वत्र क्रमग्रहणाद् अप्राप्ता । 

- **सा च** शूद्रा **स्वा च** वईश्या **वैश्यस्य** । **ते च** वैश्याशुद्रे **स्वा च** **राजन्यस्य** । एवम् **अग्रजन्मनो** ब्राह्मणस्य । ब्राह्मणक्रमेण[^६४] निर्देशे कर्तव्ये शूद्रप्रक्रमेण निर्देशः पूर्वोक्तम् एवार्थम् उपोद्बलयति । यद् उक्तम् "विकल्प आनुपूर्व्येण नावश्यं समुच्चयः" ॥ ३.१३ ॥


[^६४]:
     M G omit: brāhmaṇa-
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

There being a distinction of castes, ‘one’s own caste’ constitutes the
(upward) limit. Just as for the Brāhmaṇa, there are Kṣatriya and other
wives, so it would seem as if for the Śūdra also there would be wives
belonging to the lower orders of ‘washer-woman and carpenter.’ In order
to preclude this possibility, the text lays down the restriction that
the *Śūdra* can have a wife from his own caste only. A wife of the
higher caste is precluded by the qualifying phrase, ‘in due order,’ in
the preceding verse.

‘*She*’—*i.e*., the Śūdra woman—‘*and girl of his own caste*’—*i.e*.,
the Vaiśya woman—‘for the Vaiśya.’

‘*Those two*’—the Vaiśya woman and the Śūdra woman,—‘*and* *the girl of
his own caste*’— ‘*for the Kṣatriya*.’

Similarly, ‘*for the Brāhmaṇa*.’

The right order would appear to be that the verse should begin with the
‘*Brāhmaṇa*,’ but it begins with the ‘*Śūdra*’ which only goes to lend
strength to the aforesaid notion (that a wife of the higher class is not
permitted).

In this connection, it has been declared that ‘what is meant by the text
is that there should be *option* in order, and not a combination of all
(the several kinds of wives).’—(13)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Hopkins compares this with the Mahābhārata 13, 47. 8.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 404) as an
amplification of what has been declared in the latter half of the
preceding verse;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 740) along with the
preceding verse; and in *Aparārka*, (p. 88), which adds that what is
stated hero is permissible only in the case of people moved by lust, and
not of those who are subject to righteousness; so that these are to be
regarded as ‘inferior—‘*Kramaśaḥ*’ (verse 12) in due order, not in any
topsy-turvy ‘order—in *Smṛtikaumudī* (p. 3), which observes that the
*eva* in ‘*śūdraiva*’ is meant to preclude marriage of the ‘inverse’
order;—*i.e*., where the bridegroom’s caste is lower than that of the
bride;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 206), which adds that this
pertains to marriage for pleasure’s sake.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.12-13)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.12].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

013	It is declared that a Sudra woman alone (can be) the wife of a Sudra, she and one of his own caste (the wives) of a Vaisya, those two and one of his own caste (the wives) of a Kshatriya, those three and one of his own caste (the wives) of a Brahmana.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/014_na_brAhmaNa-xatriyayor.md">
<details open><summary><h3>014 न ब्राह्मण-क्षत्रिययोर् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

न ब्राह्मण-क्षत्रिययोर्  
आपद्य् अपि हि तिष्ठतोः ।  
कस्मिंश् चिद् अपि वृत्तान्ते  
शूद्रा भार्योपदिश्यते  ॥ ३.१४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/014_na_brAhmaNa-xatriyayor.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Under no circumstance whatsoever has a Śūdra wife been ordained for the Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣatriya,—even though these be placed in peril.—(14)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद्य् अप्य् अत्यन्तरूपवती शूद्रा, विप्रराजन्यौ च वीरप्रकृती दशमीम् अपि दशाम् अश्नुवीयातां तथापि शूद्रां नाधिवोढारौ । अत्रार्थवादः । **कस्मीम्श्चिद् अपि वृत्तान्ते** न क्वचिद् इतिहासोपाख्याने ऽप्य् **उपदिश्यते** वर्ण्यते । **आपदि** गरीयस्याम् अधिकायाम् आपदि । 

- पूर्वत्रानुज्ञातानेन प्रतिषिद्धा अतो विकल्पः ।

- <u>ननु</u> च शास्त्रलक्षणयोर् एकविषयसंनिपाते षोडशिग्रहणाग्रहणवद् विकल्पो युक्तो न तु रागलक्षणायाः प्रवृत्तेर् निषेधेन । न च शूद्रा शास्त्रलक्षणा । केवलं रागतस् तत्र प्रवृत्तिर् अप्रतिषिद्धेति पूर्वशास्त्रस्यार्थः । निषेधस् तु शास्त्रलक्षण इत्य् अविवाह्यैव शूद्रा । एतद् एवाभिप्रेत्य याज्ञवल्क्येन पठितम् "यद् उच्यते द्विजातीनां शूद्रादारोपसंग्रहः । न तन् मम मतम्" इति (य्ध् १.५६) ।

- <u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । सर्वत्रोपदेशानर्थकतयैव विकल्प आश्रीयते । यदि चात्यन्तम् एव शूद्राप्रतिषेधः स्यात् तदा क्षत्रियवैश्ये एव प्रतिप्रसूयेयाताम् आपद्य् अभ्यनुज्ञाने । प्रतिप्रसवशास्त्रम् (म्ध् ३.१३) अयं च प्रतिषेधः- द्वयम् अपि व्यर्थं स्यात् सवर्णाया नियमेन सिद्धत्वात् । तद् इदम् अनुज्ञातं प्रतिषेधश् च स्वं स्वं विरुध्यमाने विकल्प्येते[^६५] ।


[^६५]:
     M G 1st ed.: cāsvavirudhyamāne vikalpate

- <u>ननु</u> च विकल्पे कामचारः । तस्य च प्रतिप्रसवत एव सिद्धेः[^६६] प्रतिषेधो वक्तव्यो नैव । 


[^६६]:
     M G 1st ed.: siddhaḥ

- न यथाकामतः क्षत्रियवैश्ययोर् विवाह एवं शूद्रायाः, अन्यत्रापदो गरीयाः[^६७] । 


[^६७]:
     M G 1st ed.: garīyaḥ syāt

- इदं तु प्रतिपत्तुं युक्तं यत् सवर्णानियमेनासवर्णानिवृत्तेर् अर्थतः कृतायाः पुनः शूद्रानिवृत्तिर् असवर्णानिवृत्तेर् अनित्यत्वं ज्ञापयति । अनित्यत्वे चापदि सवर्णाया अलाभे वा भवति चायम् अवगमः "शूद्रा न वोढव्या इतरे तु वोढव्ये" ॥ ३.१४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Even when the Śūdra girl is extremely handsome, and the *Brāhmaṇa* or
*Kṣatriya* bridegroom is in the ‘tenth stage’ of his life,—he should
never marry the Śūdra girl.

On this point, a descriptive phrase is added—‘*under no circumstance
whatsoever*’—*i.e*., in no story at all—‘*has been ordained*’—
described.

‘*In peril*’—Even in the greatest distress.

In the preceding verse, the *Śūdra* wife has been permitted, and here
she is prohibited. Hence there should be option.

“Option is permissible only when there is possibility of the two courses
being adopted at one and the same time, and both courses are equally
sanctioned by scriptural injunctions; and it cannot be permitted when a
course of action is open to one only under the influence of passion,
while it is prohibited by scripture. In the case in question, the taking
of a Śūdra wife is not sanctioned by scripture, it is possible only
under the influence of passion; and all that the foregoing verse means
is that the marriage of a Śūdra girl under the influence of passion is
not entirely prohibited; the prohibition, on the other hand (contained
in the present verse), is purely scriptural. Hence the conclusion is
that the *Śūdra* girl should not be married at all. It is in view of
this that Yājñavalkya (*Ācāra*, 56) has declared.—‘It is said that
twice-born persons may take Śūdra wives; but that is not my opinion.”’

Our answer to the above is as follows:—In all cases, option is admitted
only in view of the likely futility of the injunction (of one or the
other coarse of action). If the *Śūdra-wife* were absolutely prohibited,
then the *Kṣatriya* and *Vaiśya* girls alone would have been mentioned
as permitted (to the Brāhmaṇa) in times of peril; and in that case, the
counter-exception (mentioned in 13), as also the prohibition (contained
in 14), would both be superfluous; as the marrying of the girl of one’s
own caste would have been already secured by the restrictive rule. Thus,
then, since there is a clear incompatibility between the sanction (in
13) and the prohibition (in 14), the two should be regarded as optional
alternatives.

“The presence of an option means that the agent may do what he likes;
and, as the marrying of the Śūdra girl (if one wishes to do so) would be
already secured by the counter-exception (in 13), there would be no need
for putting forward the prohibition (in 14) \[as the not-marrying of the
Śūdra girl is already deduced, from the general rule of marrying within
one’s own caste\].”

But the marrying of the *Śūdra* girl has not been left entirely to the
wish of the agent, in the way in which the marrying of *Kṣatriya* and
*Vaiśya* girls has been; in fact, it has not been permitted, except in
times of very great distress.

From all this the following conclusion appears the right one to
adopt:—The general rule regarding marrying a girl of one’s own caste
having already indicated, by implication, the impropriety of marrying
girls of other castes,—that the Śūdra girl should have been prohibited
again (in 14), already shows that the rule regarding not marrying girls
of other castes is not absolute; and since this rule is not absolute, it
follows that in times of difficulty, or in the event of not finding a
girl of his own caste, while the *Śūdra* girl shall never be married,
those of the other two castes may be married.—(14).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 495) as
countenancing the view that it is better by far that the Brāhmaṇa and
the Kṣatriya should avoid a Śūdra wife altogether, even though he he
overpowered by lust;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 144), where the prohibition
herein contained is explained as referring to the *first*, marriage;—and
‘*āpat*’ is explained as ‘the contingency of not finding a girl of the
same caste’;—and it adds, on the strength of the next verse, that what
is here said is applicable to the Vaiśya also.

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 749) quotes the verse and explains
‘*vṛttante*’ as ‘in a story.’

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 87), which adds that though the verse
mentions only the ‘Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣatriya’ it does not mean that it
is permissible for the Vaiśya; all thaí is meant is that for the two
higher castes it is specially reprehensible;—and in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 205), which says that this prohibition is meant for the
*first* marriage, as is clear from the foregoing verses.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.13-19)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.13].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

014	A Sudra woman is not mentioned even in any (ancient) story as the (first) wife of a Brahmana or of a Kshatriya, though they lived in the (greatest) distress.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/015_hInajAti-striyam_mohAd.md">
<details open><summary><h3>015 हीनजाति-स्त्रियम् मोहाद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

हीनजाति-स्त्रियं मोहाद्  
उद्वहन्तो द्विजातयः ।  
कुलान्य् एव नयन्त्य् आशु  
स-सन्तानानि शूद्रताम्  ॥ ३.१५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/015_hInajAti-striyam_mohAd.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Twice-born men, marrying, through infatuation, a girl of the low caste, quickly reduce their families, along with their offspring, to the position of the Śūdra.—(15).
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वस्य प्रतिषेधस्य शेषो ऽयं निन्दार्थवादः । **हीनजातिः** शूद्रैव, तस्या एव प्रकृतत्वात्, **ससंतानानि शूद्रताम्** इति निगमनात् । त एते **द्विजातयः मोहाद्** धनलोभजाद् अविवेकात् कामनिमित्तत्वाद् वा **कुलानि शूद्रतां** गमयन्ति । तस्यां जाताः पुत्राः शूद्रा भवन्त्य् एवं तत्पुत्रपौत्रा इति । अथ उच्यते **ससंतानानीति** । संतानो ऽपत्योत्पत्तिप्रबन्धः पुत्रपौत्रादिः ॥ ३.१५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This is a deprecatory exhortation, supplementing the foregoing
prohibition.

‘*Of the lout caste*’—*i.e*., of the Śūdra caste; the *Śūdra girl* being
the subject of consideration; and further, because the statement ends
with the assertion that the families along with offspring are reduced to
the position *of the Śūdra*.

‘*The twice-born men*, *through infatuation*’—*i.e*., on account of
folly arising from greed for wealth, or from lust,—‘*reduce their
families to the position of the Śūdra*.’ That is, sons born of that wife
become *Śūdras*, and so also grandsons and great-grandsons descended
from them. Hence, it is added—‘*along with their offspring*’—the term
‘*offspring*’ standing for the line of descendants, consisting of sons,
grandsons, &c.—(15).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 495) its
prohibiting the marrying of a *Śūdra* wife by the twice-born;—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 750);—and in *Aparārka* (p. 87).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.13-19)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.13].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

015	Twice-born men who, in their folly, wed wives of the low (Sudra) caste, soon degrade their families and their children to the state of Sudras.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/016_shUdrAvedI.md">
<details open><summary><h3>016 शूद्रावेदी  ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

शूद्रावेदी +++(विवाहेन)+++ पतत्य् अत्रेर्  
उतथ्यतनयस्य च +++(मते)+++।  
शौनकस्य सुतोत्पत्त्या  
तद्-अपत्यतया +++(अन्यापत्याभावे)+++ भृगोः +++(मते)+++ ॥ ३.१६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/016_shUdrAvedI.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One who marries a Śūdra girl becomes an outcastk,—according to atri and to the son of Utathya; according to Śaunaka, by the birth of a son; and according to Bhṛgu, by having children from her (alone).—(16).
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

शूद्रां विन्दति परिणयति **शूद्रावेदी** स **पतति** पतित इव । **अत्रिर् उतथ्यस्य तनयः** पुत्रस् तयोर् एतन् मतम् इत्य् उपस्करः । अयं तावद् अर्धश्लोकः पूर्वप्रतिषेधशेषः । **शौनकस्य सुतोत्पत्त्या** । शास्त्रान्तरम् इदम् । अभ्यनुज्ञाय शूद्रायाम् ऋताव् उपगमनं निषेधति सुतोत्पत्तिर् ह्य् ऋतौ युग्मासु रात्रिषु भवति । ऋतौ शूद्रां न गच्छेद् इत्य् अर्थः । **तदपत्यतया भृगोः** । इदम् अपि स्मृत्यन्तरम् । तान्य् एव शूद्रोत्पन्नान्य् अपत्यानि यस्य स तदपत्यः, तद्भावस् तदपत्यता । **भृगोर्** एतन् मतम् । ऋताव् अप्य् उपपन्नतरासु जातापत्य उपेयात् । पतितत्ववचनं चात्र निन्दैव न त्व् अस्य पतितधर्मता "पतत्स्योदकम्" इत्यादि (म्ध् ११.१८२) । एतच् च वक्ष्यामः ॥ ३.१६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Śūdrāvedi*’ is one who acquires—*i.e*., marries—a *Śūdra* girl.

‘*Becomes an outcasts*’—*i.e*., as good as an outcaste.

Such is the opinion of Atri, and of Utathya’s son. The authorities have
been mentioned with a view to inspire respect.

The first half of the verse is supplementary to the prohibition
contained in the preceding verse.

‘*According to Śaunaka*, *by the birth of a child*.’ This is an entirely
different rule. It presumes that marriage with a Śūdra girl is
permitted, and then prohibits intercourse with her during her ‘courses’;
‘birth of a son’ is possible only by having intercourse on the even days
of the woman’s period. Thus the meaning is that ‘one should not have
intercourse with his Śūdra wife during her courses.’

‘*According to Bhṛgu, by having children from her*.’ This also is a
distinct rule by itself. ‘*Tadapalya*’ is one who has only such children
as. are born of his *Śūdra* wife; and the character of such a man is
called ‘*tadapatyatā*.’ This is the opinion of *Bhṛgu*; which means that
‘after one has begotten children from wives of the more respectable
castes, he may have intercourse with the Śūdra wife.’

The mention of ‘outcaste’ here is only meant to indicate degradation; it
does not mean that the man is to be actually treated as an ‘outcaste,’
as described under 11.182. All this we shall explain later on.—(16).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

According to Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Nandana and Rāghavānanda, the
meaning of this verse is as translated. According to Nārāyaṇa’s
explanation, the translation would read as follows (rendered by
Buhler):—“A man of the family of Atri who weds a Śūdra female, becomes
an outcaste; one of the race of Utathya’s son, on the birth of a son;
and one of Śaunaka’s or Bhṛgu’s race, by having no other but Śūdra
offspring.’ Buhler adds—“It ought to be noted that, according to Kullūka
alone, the three classes refer to Brāhmaṇas, Kṣatriyas and Vaiśyas
respectively. Rāghavānanda particularly objects to the opinion.”

Burnell ??tes that the rule attributed here to Gautama (Utathya’s ???n)
is not found in the Sūtras of Gautama, where we find only a general
statement regarding the unlawful character of Śūdra offsprings of
twice-born men. And Hopkins says the same thing in regard to the *Smṛti*
of Atri.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 495);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 750); neither of which provides any
explanation of this rather obscure verse;—in *Aparārka* (p. 88), which
explains the meaning to be that “according to Atri and Gautama, the
Brāhmaṇa marrying a Śūdra girl ‘falls’ by the mere act of marriage;
according to Śaunaka, by begetting a son on her; and according to Bhṛgu,
when a grandson is born from her;”—in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 361),
which notes that this and the next verse are only meant to deprecate the
marrying of a *Śūdra* girl, ‘in the improper order’;—and in
*Smṛti-candrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 208), which adds the following notes:—The
Brāhmaṇa marrying a Śūdra girl becomes degraded,—this is the opinion of
Atri and of the ‘son of Utathya,’ *i.e*. Gautama;—hence according to
these authorities the Brāhmaṇa should never marry a Śūdra
girl;—according to Śaunaka, however, degradation results, not from
marrying, but from begetting a child on a *Śūdra* wife,—hence according
to him, the man should avoid the Śūdra wife during the
‘periods—according to Bhṛgu again, even the begetting of a child does
not lead to degradation, what leads to it is the circumstance that the
Brāhmaṇa has no children except those from his *Śūdra* wife,—so that
according to Bhṛgu only so long as he has not got a child from his
Brāhmaṇa wife shall the Brāhmaṇa avoid his Śūdra wife during the
periods’.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.13-19)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.13].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

016	According to Atri and to (Gautama) the son of Utathya, he who weds a Sudra woman becomes an outcast, according to Saunaka on the birth of a son, and according to Bhrigu he who has (male) offspring from a (Sudra female, alone).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/017_shUdrAM_shayanam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>017 शूद्रां शयनम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

शूद्रां शयनम् आरोप्य  
ब्राह्मणो यात्य् अधोगतिम् ।  
जनयित्वा सुतं तस्यां  
ब्राह्मण्याद् एव हीयते  ॥ ३.१७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/017_shUdrAM_shayanam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having placed a Śūdrā woman on his bed, the Brāhmaṇa goes to perdition; and having begotten a son by her, he falls from Brāhmaṇahood itself.—(17).
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अर्थवादो ऽयम् । यदि पुत्रम् उत्पादयति **तस्यां** ततो **ब्राह्मण्याद् एव हीयते** । अपत्यस्याब्राह्मणत्वम् इति निन्दैव । **सुतम्** इति च पुल्लिङ्गनिर्देशात् सुतोत्पत्तेर् इत्य् अत्र समानसंहितत्वे ऽपि पुत्रोत्पत्तिर् एवाभिप्रेता । तथा च दर्शितं "युग्मा रात्रयो वर्ज्याः" इति ॥ ३.१७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This is a laudatory exaggeration.

If on the Śūdra wife he begets a son, *he falls from Brāhmaṇahood itself
i.e*., the son becomes a non-Brāhmaṇa. This also is a deprecatory
exaggeration.

‘*Son*’—is in the masculine gender. So that (in the preceding verse
also) the term ‘*begetting of children*,’ ‘*sutotpattyā*,’ should be
taken to refer to the *male* child; even though in the compound the word
can be taken both ways—either as ‘*sutā*’ in the Feminine, or as
‘*suta*’ in the Masculine. It is with this view that we have pointed out
above that what is prohibited is intercourse with the woman on the even
days of her ‘period’ (as it is only by intercourse on those days that a
male child is born).—(17).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Hopkin’s remarks—“A significant alteration in the Mahābhārata 13.47.9
makes the last part of this verse read—‘He is nevertheless purified by a
ceremony known in law’.”—One fails to see what is ‘significant’ in this,
when Hindu law bristles with expiatory ceremonies in connection with
much more heinous offences than the marrying of a Śūdra wife.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.265, p. 1326) as meant to
indicate the gravity of the offence, and as laying down the actual
irrevocable loss of Brāhmaṇahood;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 495)
as prohibiting the marrying of the Śūdra by the twice-born;—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 750);—in *Aparārka* (p. 87);—in
*Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 361);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 208),
which notes that what this forbids is the marrying and begetting of
child on a Śūdra wife before a Brāhmaṇa wife.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.13-19)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.13].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

017	A Brahmana who takes a Sudra wife to his bed, will (after death) sink into hell; if he begets a child by her, he will lose the rank of a Brahmana.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/018_daiva-pitryAtitheyAni_tat-pradhAnAni.md">
<details open><summary><h3>018 दैव-पित्र्यातिथेयानि तत्-प्रधानानि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

दैव-पित्र्यातिथेयानि  
तत्-प्रधानानि यस्य तु ।  
नाऽश्नन्ति पितृ-देवास् तन्  
न च स्वर्गं स गच्छति  ॥ ३.१८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/018_daiva-pitryAtitheyAni_tat-pradhAnAni.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the rites performed by one in honour of deities, Pitṛs and Guests are dominated by her (his Śūdra wife), then the Pitṛs and the Gods do not eat of them; and the man does not go to heaven.—(18)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सार्वकालिको ऽयं निषेधः । यदि कथंचिच् छूद्रापि व्युह्यते तदैतानि कर्माणि **तत्प्रधानानि** न कर्तव्यानि । न च तया सह त्रैवर्णिकस्त्रीवद् धर्मे ऽधिकाओ ऽस्तीत्य् अर्थः । भार्यात्वाद् अधिकारे प्राप्ते निषेधो ऽयम् । अतः स्वधर्मे धनं विनियुञ्जानस्य न तदीयानुज्ञोपयुज्यते, यथा द्विजातिस्त्रीणाम् । अन्यत्र त्व् अर्थकामयोः साप्य् अनतिचरणीयैव । प्रेष्यावत् तत्कर्मोपयोगो न निषिध्यते, श्राद्धादाव् अवहननादिकार्ये तत्र न दोषः स्यात् । परिवेषणादि न कारयितव्या । 

- तत्र **दैवं** कर्म दर्शपूर्णमासादि, देवतोद्देशेन च ब्राह्मणभोजनम्, "व्रतवत्" इत्य् (म्ध् २.१८९) अत्र यथा व्याख्यातम् । **पित्र्यं** श्राद्धोदकतर्पणादि । **आतिथेयम्** अतिथेर् आराधनं भोजनपाद्यादि ।

- <u>ननु</u> च "सजात्या स्थितयान्यया" (म्ध् ९.८७) इत्य् अस्त्य् एव[^६८] प्रतिषेधः । 


[^६८]:
     M G 1st ed.: sthitayātyaye nāsty eva

- <u>नैव</u> । "स्थितया" इति तत्र श्रूयते । ऋतुमत्यां सवर्णायां कथंचिद् वासंनिहितायां प्राप्नोति क्षत्रियावैश्यावत् । अपि च नासाव् अधिकारे प्रतिषेस्हः, किं तर्हि आज्यावेक्षणादौ । पत्न्यावेक्षितम् आज्यं भवतीत्य् अङ्गत्वेनोपादीयते । पत्नीत्य् अत्र क्रत्वर्थेषु यथा कयाचिद् उपात्तया सिद्धिर् अनियमेन प्राप्ता । यथा बह्वीषु सवर्णासु यया कयाचित् सवर्णया क्रियते, एवम् असवर्णयापि मा कारीत्य् एवमर्थो ऽसौ प्रतिषेधः । प्राधान्यम् अधिकारित्वात् । 

- **नाश्नन्ति पितृदेवास् तम्** इति कर्मनैष्फल्यम् आह । **न च स्वर्गं स गच्छति** । यद्य् अप्य् अतिथिर् अश्नाति तत्फलं स्वर्गादि न भवतीति । स्वर्गग्रहणम् अतिथिपूजाफलोपलक्षणार्थम्, अनुवादश् च "धन्यं यशस्यम्" (म्ध् ३.१०६ [९६]) इत्यादि ॥ ३.१८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This prohibition pertains to all times.

Even if a Śūdra girl happens to be married, the rites, herein mentioned,
should not be performed in a manner by which she might dominate them.
That is to say, the Śūdra wife is not entitled to participate in the
husband’s religious acts, in the manner in which wives of the three
higher castes arc.

Since she is a ‘wife,’ it might be thought that she is so entitled; and
it is in view of the possibility of such notion being entertained that
we have the present prohibition. The meaning thus is that when one is
going to spend his wealth over some religious act, he need not seek her
consent, in the way he seeks that of his wives of the twice-born castes;
in other cases, however—such as the expenses incurred for seeking
prosperity and obtaining pleasure,—she is not to be disregarded. That
she should be employed, like a servant, during the performance of
*Śrāḍdha*, &c., is not prohibited; *e.g*., there would be no harm if she
were to thresh corn and so forth; but she should not be made to serve
food and do such other acts.

‘*Rites in honour of deities*’ are (1) the *Daśa-pūrnamāsa* and other
sacrifices, and (2) the feeding of Brāhmaṇas in honour of Deities, as
already explained by us under 2.180.

‘*Rites in honour* *of* *Pitṛs*’—*i.e*., Śrāddhas and offering of
water-libations.

‘*Rites in honour of guests*’—*i.e*., the reception and feeding of
guests, and offering them water for washing their feet, and so forth.

“The prohibition here put forth is already implied by the rule that
wives of one’s own caste should not be superseded by other wives.”

Not so; because the rule speaks of the wife of the same caste being
actually present. Hence people might he led. to argue as follows—“If the
wife of the Brāhmaṇa’s own caste happens to be in her courses, or
absent, then his Śūdra wife may preside over the rites, just like his
*Kṣatriya* and *Vaiśya* wives; further, the prohibition contained in the
rule referred to pertains, not to her title to preside, but simply to
the act of examining the clarified butter and so forth, which are done
by the wife in accordance with the rule that the clarified butter used
at sacrifices should be such as has been examined by the wife; and, as
the rule simply mentions the general name ‘wife,’ it may be taken to
mean that the act may be done by any wife that has been obtained.”

And it is with a view to prevent this being done,—and of wives of
different castes doing the said acts in the same way in which they are
done by any one wife from among several wives of the same caste,—that we
have the present prohibition.

The ‘*domination*,’ by the wife is due to her being entitled to the act.

‘*The deities and the Pitṛs do not eat of it*;’—this means that the acts
become futile.

‘*He does not go to heaven*;’—*i.e*., if the guest takes food, the
householder fails to attain Heaven, which he would attain as the result
of his having fed his guests. ‘*Heaven*’ here stands for all those
rewards that have been described as proceeding from the ‘honouring of
guests,’ and it is a reference to all that has been said under 3.
106.—(18).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 88), which explains it to mean
that ‘she should not be allowed to take a prominent part in the
offerings made to the Gods and Pitṛs;’—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra,
p. 206), which explains ‘*tatpradhānāni*’ as ‘at which the Śūdra wife
presides.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.13-19)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.13].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

018	The manes and the gods will not eat the (offerings) of that man who performs the rites in honour of the gods, of the manes, and of guests chiefly with a (Sudra wife's) assistance, and such (a man) will not go to heaven.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/03/019_vRShalIphena-pItasya_niHshvAsopahatasya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>019 वृषलीफेन-पीतस्य निःश्वासोपहतस्य ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वृषलीफेन-पीतस्य  
निःश्वासोपहतस्य च ।  
तस्यां चैव प्रसूतस्य  
निष्कृतिर् न विधीयते  ॥ ३.१९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/03/019_vRShalIphena-pItasya_niHshvAsopahatasya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

There is ho expiation for him who has drunk the moisture of the mouth of a Śūdra woman, who has been tainted by her breath, and who has begotten children on her.—(19).
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अर्थवादो ऽयम् । वृषल्याः फेनो **वृषलीफेनो** वक्त्रासवः, स पीतो येन । पलाण्डुभिक्षितादिवत् परनिपातः । पाठान्तरम्[^६९]- वृषलीपीतफेनस्य । पीतः फेनो यस्येति विग्रहः वृषल्या पीतफेनः । "तृतीया" (पाण् २.१.३०) इति योगविभागात् समासः । पीतः फेनो वानेनेति विग्रहे वृषल्या इति षष्ठीसमासः (पाण् २.२.८) । अर्थस् तु सर्ववृत्तिष्व् एक एव । संप्रयुज्यमानयोर् अधरपरिचुम्बनाद्य् अवश्यंभावि तेन च सहचारिणा धर्मेण मैथुनसंबन्धो लक्ष्यते । प्रकरणाच् च विवाहप्रतिषेधशेषो ऽयं न पृथग्वाक्यम् । तत्त्वे हि चुम्बनादिवर्जं नियोगधर्मो बहुमतः स्यात् । तस्माद् गच्छञ् छूद्रां चुम्बनादिपरिवर्जनेन[^७०] न किंचिच् छास्त्रार्थम् अनुलङ्घते[^७१] ।


[^७१]:
     M G 1st ed.: anutiṣṭhati


[^७०]:
     M G 1st ed.: cumbanādipariphenena


[^६९]:
     M G: pāṭhāntare

- **तस्यां चैव प्रसूतस्य** ऋतौ तु गच्छत इत्य् अर्थः । **निष्कृतिः** शुद्धिर् नास्ति इति निन्दातिशयो ऽयम्[^७२] ॥ ३.१९ ॥


[^७२]:
     M G add here: yataḥ saṃbhava evātra kaiścit saptamīpañcamyau nānujñāte "saptamī pañcamī caiva mātṛtaḥ pitṛtas tathā" iti anyais tu "ūrdhvaṃ saptamāt pañcamāc ca" tatra vikalpalabhyamānā pañcamī na vivāhyā asaṃbhave tu na doṣaḥ |
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This is an exaggerated exhortation.

‘*Vṛṣalīphena*’ is the moisture of her mouth; he by whom this has been
drunk is ‘*vṛṣalīphenapīta*;’—the past participial adjective ‘*pīta*’
being put last by the analogy of such compounds as ‘*palāṇḍubhakṣita*,’
and so forth.

If we adopt the other reading ‘*vṛṣalīpītaphenasya*,’ then the compound
‘*pītaphenaḥ*’ is to be expounded as ‘*pītaḥ pheno yasya*;’ and this,
with the term ‘*vṛṣalī*’ taken as an Instrumental *Tatpuruṣa*,—according
to Pāṇini 2. 1. 30. (the sense being ‘the moisture of whose mouth has
been drunk by a *Śūdra* woman’). Or, ‘*pītaphena*,’ expounded as above,
might be taken as forming a *Genetive Tatpuruṣa* with ‘*vṛṣalī*.’

The meaning is the same in all cases. When the husband and wife lie
together, the touching of their lips, etc., are inevitable. Hence, what
the word of the text indicates is *sexual intercourse*, by mentioning
something that is concomitant with it.

From the context it is clear that this verse is supplementary to the
foregoing prohibition, and it is not an independent assertion. If it
were an independent assertion, we should have the prohibition of
*kissing* only, and the other forms of intercourse would become
sanctioned; so that, by having intercourse with a *Śūdra* woman, only if
one avoids *kissing*, he would not be transgressing any scriptural
injunction.

‘*Who has begotten children on her*’—*i.e*., who has had intercourse
with her during her ‘courses.’

‘*Expiation*’—purification there is none. This indicates a high degree
of deprecation.—(19).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 495) along with the
preceding four verses;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 75), where
‘*phenapītasya*’ is explained as ‘*pītamukhāsavasya*’, ‘he who has drunk
wine from the mouth.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 3.13-19)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
3.13].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

019	For him who drinks the moisture of a Sudra's lips, who is tainted by her breath, and who begets a son on her, no expiation is prescribed.
</details>
</details>
</div>
