+++
title = "About the Author and the Work"

+++

The _Mitākṣarā_, or _The Epitome of the Law_, by the twelfth-century Sanskrit author Vijñāneśvara is, along with the second-century text the _Laws of Manu_ (_Mānava-dharmaśāstra_), one of the two most influential works of classical Hindu law. Its subject is _dharma_, legal and religious duty, which Olivelle has described as “the most central feature of Indian civilization down the centuries, irrespective of linguistic, sectarian, or regional differences” (_Dharma_, Motilal, 2009: vii). As the premier synthesis of _dharma_, it thus represents a watershed moment not only in the history of Sanskrit legal and religious thought but also in the intellectual history of India generally. Its genius lies in the clarity and precision of its explanations and in its creative synthesis of earlier jurisprudential thought. Widely disseminated, translated or summarized into several vernacular languages, and elaborated in many subcommentaries, the _Mitākṣarā_ exerted an unparalleled influence on legal thought in medieval and early modern India. 

Its author, Vijñāneśvara was also known as Vijñānayogin. About Vijñāneśvara’s life, we know only what the colophons to the many surviving manuscripts tell us. He was the son of a teacher named Padmanābha-bhaṭṭa, belonged to the vedic lineage (_gotra_) of the sage Bharadvāja, and was a student of Uttama. He seems to have served at the court of king Vikramāditya VI (d. 1127 CE) of the Cālukya dynasty and perhaps lived in its capital city of Kalyāṇa, today’s Basavakalyan in northeastern Karnataka. 

He wrote his masterpiece on _dharma_ the form of a commentary on the _Laws of Yājñavalkya_, an earlier treatise on _dharma_ from the fourth or fifth century CE (see Olivelle, _A Treatise on Dharma_, Harvard, 2019). This commentary, however, ranges far beyond its source text, authoritatively citing scores of other _dharma_ texts and offering sometimes elaborate new discussions of particular topics. P.V. Kane, the great historian of the Dharmaśāstra genre, likens the significance of the _Mitākṣarā_ “to that of the _Mahābhāṣya_ of Patañjali in grammar or to that of the _Kāvyaprakāśa_ of Mammaṭa in poetics” (_History of Dharmaśāstra_, vol. 1, 599).  
