+++
title = "०८"

+++
## 001-050
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/001_vyavahArAn_didRxus.md">
<details open><summary><h3>001 व्यवहारान् दिदृक्षुस् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

व्यवहारान् दिदृक्षुस् तु  
ब्राह्मणैः सह पार्थिवः ।  
मन्त्रज्ञैर् मन्त्रिभिश् चैव  
विनीतः प्रविशेत् सभाम्  ॥ ८.१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/001_vyavahArAn_didRxus.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Desirous of investigating cases, the king shall enter the court, with a dignified demeanour, along with Brāhmaṇas and councillors, versed in counsel.—(1)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

प्रजानां पालनं राज्ञो वृत्तिर् विहिता । सा चात्र ।

- शस्त्रास्त्रभृत्त्वं क्षत्रस्य वणिक्पशुकृषीर् विशः ।

- आजीवनार्थं शूद्रस्य द्विजातीनां निषेवणम् ॥ (म्ध् १०.७९)

- एवं नृपो वर्तमानो लोकानान् आप्नोत्य् अनुत्तमान् ॥ इति ।

तथा धर्मो वर्धते लोके । अन्येषाम् अपि वर्णानां क्षत्रियवृत्त्या जीविनाम् अस्त्य् एव राज्याधिकारः ।

- यः कश्चित् सर्वलोकानाम् पालकश् च नृपः स्मृतः ।

- कर्मनिष्ठा च विहिता लोकसाधारणे हिते ॥

परिपालनं च पीडापहारः । द्वयी च पीडा, दृष्टा अदृष्टा च । तत्र दुर्बलस्य बलीयसा धनहरणादिना बाध्यमाना दृष्टा पीडा । इतरस्य तु विध्यतिक्रमजनितेन प्रत्यवायेनामुत्रिकदुःखोत्पादनम् अदृष्टपीडा । प्रजा हि द्वेषमत्सरादिभिर् इतरेतरम् अयथावद् आचरन्ति, कुपथेन यान्ति, अदृष्टदोषेण बाध्येरन् । अतश् च राज्यनाशः । प्रजैश्वर्यं हि राज्यम् उच्यते । तासु विनश्यन्तीषु कस्य राज्यं स्यात् । व्यवहारादयो ऽतः ।शास्त्रदण्डेन व्यवस्थाप्यमाना न भयात् पृथक् प्रचलन्ति, तथा चोभयथापि रक्षिता भवन्ति । धनदण्डश् च राज्ञः, करशुल्कादि[^१] वा । एतदन्या[^२] धर्मिष्ठजीविका न भवतीति वृत्तिपरिक्षयाद् अपि राज्यावसादः । अतो राज्यस्थित्यर्थं व्यवहारदर्शनं कर्तव्यम् ।


[^२]:
     DK (1: 29) suggests etadanyathā


[^१]:
     DK (1: 29; 4: 1815): karaḥ śuklādi

- तद् इदानीम् उच्यते । **व्यवहारश्** चात्र वादिप्रतिवादिनोर् इतरेतराशनोद्धाराय[^३] वृत्तिर् उच्यते । अथ वा ऋणादानादयः पदार्था एव विप्रतिपत्तिविषयाः सन्तो विचारगोचरसमर्थतया कर्तव्या इति । **दिदृक्षुर्** इत्य् उक्त्वा "पश्येत् कर्याणि" (म्ध् ८.२) इति सामानाधिकरण्यम् । पुनश् च प्रत्यवमर्शः "तेषाम् अद्यम् ऋणादानम्" (म्ध् ८.४) इति । तान् पदार्थान् विचारयेद् इति संबन्धः । वक्ष्यमाणाधिकृतपुरुषाधिष्ठितः प्रदेशः **सभा** । **प्रवेशस्** तदभ्यन्तरभावः । किम् एक एव प्रविशेत् । नेत्य्[^४] आह **ब्राह्मणैः सहेति** । अथ **मन्त्रज्ञैर्** इति कस्य विशेषणम् । न तावन् मन्त्रिणः, मन्त्रित्वाद् एव सिद्धेः । न हि मन्त्रम् अजानानो मन्त्रीति शक्यते वक्तुम् । नापि ब्राह्मणानाम्, व्यवहारदर्शने ऽधिकृतानां तत्परिज्ञानम् अदृष्टाय[^५] स्यात् । 


[^५]:
     M G J: adṛṣṭaṃ na; I follow DK (1: 29).


[^४]:
     M G J: praviśec cety; I follow DK (1: 29; 4: 1815).


[^३]:
     M G J: -āśanodhārāya; I follow DK (1: 29); DK (4: 1815) suggests: -āśayoddhārāya

- अत्रोच्यते । ब्राह्मणविशेषणम् एवैतत् । ते ह्य् अमन्त्रज्ञा[^६] भूत्वा निरपेक्षम् अवधारयन्तः स्युः । अन्यथा राज्ञो ऽनर्थम् आवहेयुः । तथा हि महामत्याश्रितः कश्चिज् जनपदेन व्यवहरन् सहसा जितो यदि न दण्ड्यते धनं वावष्टभ्य न दाप्यते, तदा समत्वेन व्यवहारदर्शनं न कृतं स्यात्, पक्षपातम् अशक्तिं वास्य जनपदा मन्येरन् । अथ दण्ड्यते, महामात्यक्षोभाद् अपि प्रकृतिविकृतं स्यात् । मन्त्रज्ञास् तु सन्तः संशयितारो यदि निर्णेतव्यस्य केनचिद् अपदेशेन प्रसङ्गरोधं कृत्वा रहसि राजानं परिबोधयन्ति "अनयोर् विवादिनोर् अयं जीयते ऽयं जयतीति, व्यवहारस् त्व् अस्माभिर् न तदानीम् एव निर्णीत इति स्वामी प्रमाणम्" । तत्र राजैवं विदित्वा महामात्यम् आदेशयति "त्वदीयो मनुष्यो जीयते, मम हनिर् मा भूद् इति संप्रति निर्णयो ऽवधीरितः । त्वम् एव तथा कुरु यथैष मनुष्यः संधीयते, बाधास्य व्यपनीयते" । ते मन्त्रिणो वादेयवाक्या मनुष्याणां सर्वेषाम् अनर्थ्यां च प्रवृत्तिं प्रतिबध्नन्ति ।


[^६]:
     DK (1: 29; 4: 1815) suggests: hi mantrajñā

<u>अन्ये</u> तु काकाक्षिवद् उभयविशेषणम् अर्थबेदेन **मन्त्रज्ञ**पदं मन्यन्ते । यदा मन्त्रिणो विशेष्यन्ते तत्तद्धातुतत्परिज्ञानं[^७] मन्त्रज्ञानम् । ब्राह्मणपक्षे तु कार्यार्थसमभावश् च । मन्त्रिब्राह्मणानां न प्रवेशमात्रम् एव, किं तर्हि निर्णयं "पश्येत्" (म्ध् ८.२) इत्य् उत्तरत्रवाक्याद्[^८] यथायोग्यम्,[^९] इतरथा अदृष्टाय प्रवेशः स्यात् । अतो नैकाकी निर्णयं कुर्यात्, किं तर्हि तैः सह निरूप्येति ।  
**विनीतः** वाक्पाणिपादचापलरहितः । वेपतो ह्य् अनर्थः स्यात् । **पार्थिव**ग्रहणान् न क्षत्रियस्यैवायम् उपदेशः, किं तर्ह्य् अन्यस्यापि पृथिव्याम् अधिपतेर् देशेश्वरस्य, न ह्य् अन्यथा[^१०] राज्यम् अविचलितं भवतीति ॥ ८.१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been laid down that the protection of the people is a duty of the
king; and this duty has been described in the following text: (*a*) ‘As
a means of livelihood, to carry arms and weapons for the Kṣatriya, and
to trade, to rear cattle and agriculture for the Vaiśya, and the serving
of the twice-born for the Śūdra’—(10.79). The king who acts up to this
attains unexcelled regions; and in this manner virtue prospers among the
people.

Other castes also, who may be living the life of the Eṣattriya, are
entitled to kingship:—‘Whoever happens to be the protector of the people
is regarded as the *king*, Lord-Protector; and their duty has been
ordained to consist in the good of the common people.’ By ‘protection’
here is meant the *removal of troubles*.

Troubles are of two kinds —*seen* and *unseen*. It is a case of ‘seen
trouble’ when the weaker man is oppressed by the stronger, who takes
away by force his belongings; and it is a case of ‘unseen trouble’ when
the latter person suffers pain in the other world, through the sin
accruing to him on account of his having transgressed the law (by taking
what did not belong to himself). People very often act towards pne
another in hatred, jealousy and so forth, and hence going by the wrong
path, they become subject to ‘unseen’ evils; and thence follows the
disruption of the kingdom; since it is only the *prosperity of the
people* that is called ‘kingdom’; so that when the people are in
trouble, where would the ‘kingdom’ lie?

It is for this reason that when cases are investigated and decided in
strict accordance with the ordinances of scriptures, people, through
fear, do not deviate from the right path; and hence they become
protected against both kinds of trouble. Then again, in as much as for
the king there is no other lawful moans of livelihood except the fines
imposed upon criminals, and the taxes and duties, any obstacles in the
proper administration and collection of those leads the kingdom into
trouble.

From all this it follows that for the sake of preserving the kingdom,
the investigation of cases is necessary, and it is this that is now
described.

The term ‘*vyavahāra*,’ ‘case,’ is the name given to that action of the
plaintiff and the defendant which they have recourse to for the purpose
of reclaiming their rights. Or, it may stand for the non-payment of
debts and such other matters themselves, which often become the subjects
of dispute and as such fit for investigation, which thus becomes the
duty of the king.

The term ‘*desirous of investigating*’ is to be construed with ‘shall
investigate the suits’ (of the next verse) and the said ‘points of
dispute’ are referred to in detail again (in verse 4)—‘Of these, the
first is non-payment of debts, etc.’; the construction being that ‘he
shall investigate all these matters.’

The ‘court’ is that place which is presided over by the officer going to
be described below;—‘*entering*’ means *going into* the place.

The question arising as to whether or not the king shall enter the
Court, alone, unattended, the text adds—‘*along with Brāhmaṇas*.’

*Question*.—“What does the adjective ‘*versed in counsel*’ qualify? It
cannot qualify the ‘*councillors*’; as the said qualification is implied
by the very name ‘councillor,’ for one who does not know the art of
counselling can never be called a ‘councillor.’ Nor can it qualify the
‘Brāhmaṇas’; because since they are entrusted with the work of
investigating cases, the knowledge of *counsel* (if prescribed) could be
prescribed only for some transcendental purpose.”

To the above we offer the following reply: The qualification is of the
‘Brāhmaṇas’; if they were ignorant of counsel, they would arrive at
random and wrong conclusions, and thereby bring trouble to the King, for
instance, if a certain ordinary person were to file a suit against some
one connected with the Chief Minister,—and the latter happens to lose
the case,—then, if he were not fined, or if he were not forced to pay up
the fine, the administration of justice would not be impartial; and the
people would come to the conclusion that the King is cither partial or
too weak-minded;—on the other hand, if the man were fined, this would
displease the Chief Minister, and that also would lead to trouble among
the people. In such cases, if the investigating officers happen to be
‘versed in counsel,’ then, whenever they are in any such suspense, they
postpone the proceedings of the case, under some pretext, and advise the
King in private, to the following effect—‘You please do something
yourself, whereby the man may be made to compromise between these two
parties,—this party loses and that party wins the case,—but the case has
not been disposed of by us; the decision now rests with your Majesty.’
Thereupon, the King, having come to know the facts of the case, orders
the Chief Minister to the following effect—‘Your man is going to lose
his case,—but for the present the decision has been postponed, in order
that your prestige may not suffer; it is for you to do something whereby
the other party may be appeased and his grievance removed.’ Upon this
the Minister, whose advice is accepted by all men, takes steps to stop
the evil propensities of all men.

Others hold that, just as the single eye of the crow operates in both
sockets, so the epithet ‘*versed in counsel*’ is applicable to both,
‘*Brāhmaṇas*’ and ‘*councillors*,’ but in different senses: when
qualifying the ‘*councillors*,’ being ‘versed in counsel’ connotes *the
knowledge of the details of the cases*; and when qualifying the
‘*Brāhmaṇas*,’ it connotes *impartiality*.

The Brāhmaṇas and the Councillors are not to *enter* only; but they are
to help, in the best manner they can, in the ‘investigating of suits’
(spoken of below). If this were not meant, then their ‘entering’ could
only be intended to serve some transcendental purpose. Thus the sense is
that the King shall not decide cases by himself alone, but in
consultation with the councillors and Brāhmaṇas.

‘*With a dignified demeanour*’;—*i.e*., free from fickleness of speech,
hand and feet. If he were fickle, there would be trouble.

The use of the term ‘*pārthiva*,’ ‘*king*,’ implies that the teaching
here addressed is meant not only for one who is *Kṣatriya* by caste, but
for others also, who may happen to be owners of land and a kingdom.
Because unless he dues what is here laid down his sovereignty does not
become duly established.—(1)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 600), which explains
‘*mantrajñaḥ*’ as ‘*arthaśāstrajñaḥ*’, ‘learned in the Science of
Polity’, and deduces the sense that the person who tries cases should
act up to the principles of the Science of Polity, in so far as they are
not incompatible with the Dharmaśāstra, the Ethical Science.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 18), to the effect that
having entered the court, the king shall carry on the work, in
association with learned men and with councillors;—in *Vyavahāramayūkha*
(page 2) in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 1b):—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(3a), which has. the following notes—‘*Vyavahārān*’, points of dispute
between the plaintiff and the defendant,—‘*didṛkṣuḥ*’, with a view to
determine,—‘*pṛthivīpatiḥ*,’ includes *non-Kṣatriyas*
also,—‘*mantrajñaiḥ*’, persons conversant with the method of doing
business in due accordance with the exigencies of time and place,—this
qualifies ‘*brāhmaṇaiḥ*’, ignorant Brāhmaṇas being prone to give hasty
advice and thereby create trouble,—‘*mantribhiḥ*’ stands for experienced
councillors;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 4a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.1-2)  
**

*Gautama* (13.26).—‘The king or the judge ora Brāhmaṇa learned in the
scriptures shall examine the witnesses.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.2).—‘Let the king or the minister transact the business
on the bench.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.72).—‘Let the king try causes himself, accompanied by
well-instructed Brāhmaṇas.’

Do. (71.60).—‘Near the Fire, Deities and Brāhmaṇas, he shall raise the
right arm.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.359).—‘Every day, he shall look into cases himself,
surrounded by members of the Assembly.’

Do. (2.1).—‘The king shall try causes, accompanied by learned Brāhmaṇas,
in strict accordance with legal scriptures,—being free from anger and
avarice.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 596).—‘The king, assisted by the minister, free
from all love and hatred, shall carefully look into the causes of
contending parties.’

*Nārada* (Do. p. 599).—‘The king composedly looking into cases himself
obtains bright fame here and reaches the regions of Indra.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.7, 9-13).—‘*Vyavahāra* i s that which, by
discriminating the good from the evil, ministers to the virtues of both
the people and the king, and furthers their interests. The king should
attentively look after law-suits, freeing himself from anger and greed,
according to the dictates of the legal scriptures,—in the company of the
Judge, the Minister, the Brāhmaṇa and the Priest. He should never singly
try cases of two parties, or hear their statement. Neither the wise king
nor the Councillors are to hold a trial in secret.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.85).—‘The King should enter the court modestly,
together with the Brāhmaṇas and the Ministers versed in
state-craft,—with the object of investigating cases.’

*Kātyāyana* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra).—‘The King shall be accompanied by
those permanent members who are experienced, having hereditary
connections, the best of the twice-born, expert in the sacred law and in
the science of polity.’

*Kātyāyaṇa* (Parāśaramādhava--Vyavahāra, p. 17).—‘That place is called
*Dharmādhikaraṇa*, Court, where the truth regarding suits is
investigated in pursuance of the legal scriptures.—The king shall enter
the court after having finished all his daily duties, and after having
duly honoured, with flowers and ornaments, his preceptor, astrologers,
physicians, deities, Brāhmaṇas and Priests.’

Do. (Vīramitrodaya-Vyavahāra, p. 14).—‘If the King looks into lawsuits,
with the assistance of the Judge, the Minister, the Brāhmaṇa and the
Priest, he attains heaven.’

Do. (Vyavahāratattva, p. 2).—‘Accompanied by the Judge, the Minister,
the Brāhmaṇa and Priest, the King himself shall determine their victory
or defeat.’

*Bṛhaspati* (1.4-5).—‘The king, his chosen representative Judge, other
Judges, the Law, the Accountant and the Scribe, Gold, Fire, Water, and
the Bailiff are the ten components of the Court; in which the King
examines causes with due attention.’

Do. (1.20 *et. seq*.).—‘Let the King try causes, attended by these
Judges, after having entered the Court, in a sitting or standing
posture. Having risen early in the morning and performed ablutions
according to rule, and having honoured the elders, astrologers,
physicians, deities, Brāhmaṇas and domestic priests.’

Do. (27.25).—‘Let the King every day examine in common with learned
Brāhmaṇas, the suits preferred by litigants, as also those instituted by
the King himself.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

मात्स्यम्यायनिवृत्त्या लोकस्थित्यर्थम् अयं व्यवहारान् द्रष्टुम् अन्वेषणशीलः **ब्राह्मणैः सह पार्थिवः** यान् उपरिष्टाद् वक्ष्यति "यस्मिन् देशे निषीदन्ति विप्रा वेदविदस् त्रयः" इति तैः सह । यतस् तेषाम् इदं विशेषणं क्रियते **मन्त्रज्ञैर्** इति । एवं च यदि वेदविदो ऽपि सन्तो **मन्त्रज्ञा** न भवन्त्य् अधिकलक्षणप्राप्त्यर्थम् इदं तद्विशेषणम् । लोकव्यवहारज्ञा **मन्त्रज्ञाः** । **मन्त्रिभिश् चैव मन्त्रज्ञैर्** इति समानं पूर्वविशेषणम् । इयांस् तु विशेषः- मन्त्रिणो राजतन्त्रव्यवहारज्ञा नियोगत इष्यन्ते, इतरत्र तु न प्रतिषेधः । अतस् तान् अप्य् एवं विशिनष्टि । **विनीतः प्रविशेत् सभाम्** । **विनीतो** ऽनुद्धतवेषालङ्कारः । **सभां** वक्ष्यमाणाम् "ब्रह्मणस् तां सभां विदुर्" इति । सत्य् अपि च ब्राह्मणस्य धर्मोपदेष्टृत्वे गुरुत्वे च व्यवहारदर्शने ब्राह्मणो न प्रधानीक्रियते । असमर्थो ह्य् असाव् अल्पपरिग्रहत्वाद् अकार्यकारिणो वशीकर्तुम् । क्षत्रियस्य तु करशुल्कप्रीतिभोगदण्डपरिक्रयेण प्रजापालनोपदेशात् परिग्रहमहत्त्वं वृत्तिमतो ऽर्थगृहीतम्, यतः प्रजासंरक्षणार्थम् अकार्यकारिणां निग्रहे तस्य सामर्थम् अस्ति । एवं च सति व्यवहारदर्शने क्षत्रियः प्राधान्येनोपदिश्यते । अथ वादृष्टप्रयोजन एव क्षत्रियस्य व्यवहारदर्शनोपदेशः । व्यवहरणं व्यवहारः । इहैको ऽपि स्वार्थ[संबन्धितया] व्यवहर्तीतरो ऽप्य् अन्यथेत्य् एवं विविधं नानावहरणम्, विरुद्धं वेतरेतरहरणं व्यवहारः ॥ ८.१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

001	A king, desirous of investigating law cases, must enter his court of justice, preserving a dignified demeanour, together with Brahmanas and with experienced councillors.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/002_tatrAsInaH_sthito.md">
<details open><summary><h3>002 तत्रासीनः स्थितो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

तत्रासीनः स्थितो वापि  
पाणिम् उद्यम्य दक्षिणम् ।  
विनीत-वेषाभरणः  
पश्येत् कार्याणि कार्यिणाम्  ॥ ८.२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/002_tatrAsInaH_sthito.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

There, either seated or standing, raising his right hand, subdued in dress and ornaments, he shall look into the suits of the suitors.—(2)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**आसीनः** धर्मासनोपविष्टः । **स्थितः** निषिद्धगतिर् अनुपविष्ट एव । स्थानासनयोश् च व्यवस्थितो विकल्पः कार्यविशेषापेक्षः । गरीयसि कार्ये बहुवक्तव्य उपविष्ट आसीनः, लघीयसि स्वल्पवक्तव्ये स्थितः । क्रममाणस्य सर्वथा प्रतिषेधः । स हि मार्गावलोकनपरो नार्थिप्रत्यर्थिनोर् निपुणतो वचनम् अवधारयेत् । 

<u>अन्ये</u> त्व् अदृष्टार्थं तथा मन्यन्ते । तपस्विब्राह्मणादिषु[^११] विवादिषु स्थितेषु स्थितः आसीनेष्व् आसीनः ।   
**पाणिम् उद्यम्येति** । उत्तरपाणिम्[^१२] उद्धृत्योत्थानं कृत्वेत्य् अर्थः । सूत्रकृतो ऽयं व्यतिक्रमः[^१३] सर्वदा विहितत्वाद् व्यसनोपव्यानम् एतत् । तेनायम् अर्थः- हस्त उत्क्षेप्तव्यः, न पुनः समीपवर्तिनि संलग्नः कर्तव्यः । प्रश्ननिषेधावसरे च तेनाभिनेतव्यम्, न तु प्रव्याणादिना । अनेन व्यवहारदर्शनेन तात्पर्यं ख्यापितं भवति । प्रायेण हि पुरुषाः[^१४] कार्येषु प्रयत्नवन्तो हस्तम् उद्यच्छन्ति । यथासुखोपविष्टं व्रजति कर्तारं ततश् च परिजने तद् एतद् राजा चित्तं[^१५] न ददाति सभ्यैर् निर्भयैर् वयं जिता इति । पाणिग्रहणं बाहूपलक्षणार्थम् । केवलस्य हि हस्तस्य यावद् व्यवहारदर्शनं व्यापारणं पीडाकरम् । न चायम् अदृष्टार्थ उपदेशः ।  

**विनीतवेषाभरण** इति । पूर्वश्लोके बाह्याभ्यन्तरेन्द्रियविषयावधानार्थो ऽभिहितः । अयं तावल् लोकानां[^१६] शालीनतया सुखोपसर्पणार्थः[^१७] । उद्धतवेषे[^१८] हि रजनि[^१९] तथाविधानाम् अप्रतिपत्तिः स्यात् । अत उद्धतवेषाभरणं[^२०] न कथंचित् स्यात्[^२१] । **वेषः**[^२२] केशवसनविन्यासादिविशेषः । **आभरणं** कर्णिकादि । तत्र उद्धतवेष[^२३] ऊर्ध्ववस्त्रो जवनरक्ताम्बरधारितेत्यादि । उद्धताभरणो[^२४] दीप्तिमद्बहुरत्नालंकारो बहुहारश्[^२५] च । स ह्य् आदित्य इव दुर्निरीक्ष्यः सामान्यजनानां विशेषतो ऽभियुक्तानाम् । **पश्येद्** इति सभाप्रवेशस्य प्रयोजनम् आह । पश्येद् विचक्षणः ।



[^२५]:
     M G: bahvāhāraś


[^२४]:
     M G: uddhṛtābharaṇo


[^२३]:
     M G: uddhṛtaveṣa


[^२२]:
     M G DK omit: veṣaḥ


[^२१]:
     M G DK omit: syāt


[^२०]:
     M G: uddhṛta-


[^१९]:
     M G add: vṛttilakṣaṇayā; DK adds: pratilabhya


[^१८]:
     M G: uddhṛtaveṣe


[^१७]:
     DK: -ārtham


[^१६]:
     M G: śvagaṇānāṃ; DK (1: 30) svagaṇānāṃ, for ayaṃ tāval lokānāṃ

- अयं च राज्ञो दर्शनापदेशो दण्डप्रणयने यथास्थानार्थप्रतिपादनपर्यन्तो भविष्यति । तात्पर्यं[^२६] तस्यैव रक्षाधिकारः प्रयुक्तः स्यात् । ईदृशस्य च दर्शनस्यान्येषाम् असंभावनाद् अनधिकारः । सर्वेषां संशयच्छेदमात्रफलं[^२७] तु व्यवहारदर्शनं प्रायश्चित्तोपदेशवद् विदुषो ब्राह्मणस्यास्त्य् एव । उक्तं हि "धर्मसंकटेषु ब्रूयात्" इति । तथैकवर्ग्याणां वाणिज्यकर्षकपशुपालप्रभृतीनां स्ववर्गसामयिकार्थविप्रतिपत्ताव् अन्यस्यां वोत्कृष्टनिर्णयाद् भूतिर्[^२८] इति तथाविधव्यवहारदर्शने नियोगः । तथा हि पठितम् ।


[^२८]:
     M G: votsukanirṇayādūtir; DK (1: 31; not 4.1816): pūtir; (the reading here is uncertain).


[^२७]:
     M G: -mātram | phalaṃ


[^२६]:
     DK (1: 31; not 4: 1816): tāvatparyantaṃ

- कुलानि श्रेणयश् चैव गणाश् चाधिकृतो नृपः ।

- प्रतिष्ठा व्यवहाराणां गुर्वेभ्यस् तूत्तरोत्तरम् ॥ इति । (न्स्म् मा १.७)

- तत्र "कुलानि" बन्धुजनसमूहः । तैर् या व्यवस्था कृता ततो न विचलितव्यम् । अथ तत्र नाश्वस्युस्[^२९] तवैते ऽधिकतरं संबन्धिन इति वदन्तस्[^३०] ततः श्रेणिषु निवेदितव्यम् । 


[^३०]:
     M G: vadadbhis tu


[^२९]:
     M G: tāś ca syus

- "श्रेणयः" समानव्यवहारजीविनो वणिक्प्रभृतयः । तेषां बन्धुभ्यो ऽधिकगुरुत्वम् । बान्धवा हि[^३१] ज्ञातिधर्मभयाद् विचलितं न नियच्छन्ति । श्रेणयस् तु राजगमनेन श्रेणिधर्मो राजपुरुषप्रवेशात् परिभवनीयत्वेन नश्यतीति अविचलनार्थं प्रतिभूग्रहणपूर्वकं विचारयन्ति य एतस्माद् विचलति[^३२] । परिषदि दण्डो दातव्यश् चलितुं वापि त्वया न देयम् इति । 


[^३२]:
     M G: vicalanti


[^३१]:
     M G: bāndhavādi-

- "गणाः" गणशश् चारिणो गृहप्रासादादिकरा मठब्राह्मणादयश् च । ते स्वगणिनां व्यवहारं[^३३] पश्येयुः । तत्राविचलार्थम्[^३४] उपसदः कर्तव्याः । पूर्वे समानकर्मजीविन एकाकिनो ऽपि, इमे तु संभूयकारिण इति विशेषः । श्रेणिभ्यः संभूयकारितया विवादिनो भूमिज्ञत्वात् । 


[^३४]:
     M G: -ārtha


[^३३]:
     M G add: na

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु कुलानीति मध्यस्थपुरुषान् आहुः । ते हि कार्याभ्यन्तरा अश्रेणिकृता एव निर्णेतारः ।

- "अधिकृतः"[^३५] त्रैविद्यो विद्वाण् ब्राह्मणः । तस्य हि धर्मसंकटेषु प्रवक्तृत्वं विहितम् । तस्य पूर्वेभ्यो गुरुत्वं वैदुष्यात् । नृपस्यापि गुरुत्वम् अतिशयशक्तित्वाद् अतः स्वयं विदुषा नृपेण निर्णीते नास्त्य् एतत् । 


[^३५]:
     M G omit: adhikṛtaḥ

- यो मन्येताजितो ऽस्मीति यो न्यायेनापि पराजितः । (य्ध् २.३०९)

- द्विगुणं दण्डम् आस्थाय तत् कार्यं पुनर् उद्धरेत् ॥ (न्स्म् मा १.५६) इति ॥ 

- अन्येषु करणेष्व् एतद् भवति । तत्र ह्य् अस्ति वचनावसरो नाधिकृतैः सम्यक् निर्णीतं राज्ञा तु विवेचिते किं वक्ष्यतीति ।

- अर्थान्तरम् — नृपैर् "अधिकृतो" राजस्थानीयब्राह्मणः । तथान्यस्य गृहिणः स्वतन्त्रस् तु गृहे गृहीति स्वातन्त्र्यस्मरणाद् दण्डपर्यन्तो ऽस्त्य् एव व्यवहारः सुपरीक्षितो भवति, वासनाविनयार्थं श्रुतिग्राह्यप्रसक्तशिष्यसुताद्याः "अन्यत्र दण्डाच् छारीरात् पतनीयाच्[^३६] च कर्मणः" इति । स्वल्पे ऽपराधे गृहस्थ एव राजायते । महति व्यतिक्रमे राजनिवेदनम् एवोचितम् इत्य् अस्यार्थः । 


[^३६]:
     M G: pātanīyāc

अतश् च यत् कैश्चित् पश्येद् इति परिसंख्यार्थत्वम् आरोप्य ब्राह्मणादीनाम् अधिकार आशङ्कितः पुनश् च क्लेशेन समर्थितः, तद् अयुक्तम्, विषयभेदाद् अधिकारभेदात् । स्वविषयो हि राज्ञो दण्डावधिकः, ब्राह्मणादीनां निर्णयावधिः । अधिकारो ऽपि भिन्नः । राज्ञो राज्यस्थितिप्रयोजनम्, इतरेषां संसयच्छेदादेर् अपरोपकारकत्वम् । अतो नो वृत्तिसंकराशङ्कैव[^३७] नास्ति । कार्यो विप्रतिपत्तिनिरासः । अर्थिनां विप्रतिपन्नयोर् हि साम्यं व्यवहारदर्शने राज्ञा कर्तव्यम् । नो चेत् संविदाने को राज्ञः स्वाधिगमे निरोधः । कायकशुद्धौ हि श्वानिरोधवान् इति वक्ष्यामः<sup> </sup>[^३८] ॥ ८.२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Sealed*’—sitting on the judgment-seat.

‘*Standing*’—not moving, nor seated.

‘Sitting’ and ‘standing’ constitute the only two possible alternatives,
to be adopted in accordance with the gravity of the business. If the
suit is an important one, and there is much to be said (by the parties),
he shall he *seated*; whereas if the suit is a light one, and there is
not much to be said, he shall remain *standing*. in either case, *moving
about* is absolutely precluded. While moving, his attention would be
fixed upon the path he is treading, so that he could not rightly grasp
what is being said by the two parties.

Others have explained that the rule here laid down is with a view to
some transcendental results; and that what is meant is that when the
parties consist of ascetics or Brāhmaṇas, and these remain standing, the
King also shall remain *standing*, but on their being seated, he also
shall be *sealed*.

‘*Raising his hand*’—*i.e*., holding the hand high. This (if taken
literally) would militate against what the *Sūtra-kāras* have said
regarding the upper garment being always *under the right arm*. Hence
all that the text means is that the hand shall he lifted up, and not
allowed to be in contact with any other person near at hand. In fact,
this is to be done only when the King is disallowing a certain question.
This shows that he is alert and carefully watching the proceedings of
the case. For as a rule, whenever a man is devoting great attention to
any work, he holds his arms high. If, on the other hand, he sits at
ease, the defeated party is likely to say—‘The King does not pay
attention to the case, hence the members of the court, not fearing him,
have decided the case against us.’

‘*Hand*’ here stands for the *arm*; otherwise if one were to keep the
*hand* only lifted up throughout the proceedings, this would be
extremely painful. Nor is the advice offered with a view to any
transcendental purpose.

‘*Subdued in dress and ornaments*’—What was meant by ‘*dignified
demeanour*’ in the preceding verse was that he should keep control over
his external and internal organs in relation to their respective
objects; and this was with a view to being easily accessible to even the
most modest suitors. If he were too gaudy in his appearance, it would be
difficult for the more modest suitors to retain their presence of mind.

It is for this reason that gaudy dress and ornaments should be avoided.
‘*Dress*’ stands for the making up of the hair and clothes;
‘*ornaments*’ for ‘*Karṇikā*’ (the lotus-shaped Ear-ornament) and the
rest. So ‘gaudy dressing’ would consist in the wearing of
richly-coloured clothes and so forth. If the King is gaudily dressed and
wearing brightly be-jewelled ornaments, it could be as difficult to look
at him as at the sun, for ordinary people, specially for the accused
(who would thus lose their presence of mind during the trial).

‘*Look into*.’—This declares the purpose for which the King; is to enter
the Court-room.

This teaching regarding the King himself ‘looking into’ the suits is
with special reference to the inflicting of punishments; and applies to
the entire investigation, ending with the full setting forth of the
statements of both parties. And the intention is that by doing this he
would be fulfilling his duty of ‘protecting’ the people. Such ‘looking
into’ cases not being possible for other persons, no one else could be
entitled to it. As for helping in the settling of doubtful points, this
result of the investigation interests all persons; and as such like the
rules relating to expiations, this also falls within the province of the
learned Brāhmaṇa; specially as in connection with the latter it has been
declared that ‘he shall speak out on difficult points of law.’ Similarly
when a case is being investigated where the parties belong to the same
profession,—such for instance as traders, cultivators, cattle-breeders,
etc.,—if other persons belonging to the same profession And that the
points in dispute are such as would affect them all, then they are all
entitled to take part in the investigation.

In this connection they declare as follows (*Nārada*, 1.8)—‘(*a*)
Families, (*b*) Guilds, (*c*) Tribes, (*d*) Authorised person, and (*e*)
the King constitute the very foundation of case-proceedings; and among
these the following is superior to the preceding.’

Of these,

(*a*) the term ‘families’ stands for the body of relations; the parties
shall not deviate from the decision arrived at by these,

(*b*) If however one party should have no confidence in these, and
should say—‘these persons are more nearly related to you,’—then the case
shall he referred to the guilds,—this term ‘guild’ standing for a body
of trailers and others who may he following the same profession; these
persons are weightier than relatives; because the latter, through fear
of relations, do not always exercise a check upon the person who
deviates from the right path; while the members of a guild fight shy of
any matter relating to themselves going before the King, as that would
lend the King’s officers ah opportunity for interfering in the work of
their guild; and hence they always take from the parties concerned
sufficient security against their deviating from the decision arrived
at, before they proceed to investigate a dispute; the understanding with
the person standing security being that if the party deviate from the
decision arrived at by the guild, he shall pay a stipulated line, or he
should not let him deviate from it.

(*c*) ‘*Tribes*’—consist of persons who always move about in groups;
*e.g*., masons, temple0priests, and so forth. They would investigate the
cases of disputes arising among themselves; and for the enforcing of
decisions they shall appoint committees. The difference between these
two (‘Guilds’ and ‘Tribes’) is that the former consists of persons
following the same profession and they can act singly also, whereas
*Tribes* always act collectively. And it is because the Tribes act
collectively that the disputants are afraid of them. According to others
however, the term ‘*Families*’ stands for neutrals; and such persons,
even though not members of the same guild, are conversant with all the
ins and outs of the case, and as such capable of coming to a decision,

(*d*) The term ‘authorised person’ stands for the Brāhmaṇa learned in
the Vedas; it has been laid down that such Brāhmaṇas are entitled to
speak on all disputed points of law. Such a person is superior to the
foregoing, because of his learning.

(*e*) The King’s superiority rests upon his great power. It is for this
reason that when a case has been decided by the learned King, there is
no occasion for what is laid down in the following words—‘If a party,
even though legally defeated, thinks that he has not been justly
defeated, he shall be fined twice the amount of the suit, and the case
re-opened’ (*Yājñavalkya*, Vyavahāra, 306); this is what applies to
other cases (decided by others), For in the case of these latter there
may he some ground for asserting that ‘the judges have not decided
rightly’; but when the King himself has decided it, what can he said
against it?

Another explanation of the term ‘authorised person’ is that it stands
for the Brāhmaṇa who has been appointed by the King to act as his
substitute. Similarly the ordinary householder also would be an
‘authorised person,’ so far as his own household-affairs are
concerned,—this being in accordance with the declaration that ‘the
householder is master in his own house,’ which means that ho is free to
deal with all disputes within his own household, up to the infliction of
punishment,—specially with a view to proper discipline among his
children and pupils; but he may deal with all cases, except the
inflicting of bodily punishment, or the doing of acts conducive to
depravity. What is meant is that in the case of minor offences the
householder himself acts like the King, while in that of serious
offences, it is necessary to report to the King.

From all this it follows that there is no basis for the doubt raised by
some people regarding the right of the Brāhmaṇa and others to pronounce
judgments,—on the ground that the injunction contained in the present
verse that the King ‘shall look into the suits’ precludes all other
persons,—or, for the great trouble that they have taken to establish
that right. Because the right of the several persons pertains to
different kinds of cases. The King’s right exteṇḍs up to the infliction
of punishments, while that of the Brāhmaṇa and others extends only up to
the pronouncing of judgments,—this latter right is distinct from the
former. Then again, the motive of the King in looking into cases
consists in the proper administration of his kingdom, while that of the
others lies only in settling doubtful points for the benefit of other
people. So that there is no possibility of cross-purposes arising.

The ‘*suits of sailors*’ consist in the settling of disputes. Whenever
disputes arise between two persons, settlements should be brought about
by the King by means of careful investigation. Otherwise if the parties
come to an agreement themselves, where would he the supremacy of the
King?—(2)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Raising his right arm*’—See 4.58.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 600);—the second half in
*Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 2);—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 18) in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (p. 2a);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 52), which
says that ‘seated or standing’ is meant to predude *lying down* and
*walking*;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (3a), which has the following
notes:—‘*Vinīta*’ is calm and dignified’—‘*pāṇimudyamya*’, taking the
hand out of the upper wrapper, *i.e*., having gathered together his
clothes,—‘*paśyet*’ determine, decide,—‘*kāryāṇi*,’ non-payment of debt
and so forth;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 40).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.1-2)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.1].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

[**आसीनस्** तपस्विविद्वद्]ब्राह्मणगुरुवर्जम् इतरजनस्य **पश्येत्**; स्थित्वो वापि तपस्विप्रभृतीनां वर्णोत्तमानाम् । **स्थितो वापि** तपस्विप्रभृतीनां वर्णोत्तमानाम् । **पाणि**ग्रहणं बाह्पलक्षणार्थम् । यस्माद् ब्रह्मसभैषा । तथा चोक्तम् अग्न्यगारादिषु [दक्षिणबाहूद्धरणम् । **विनीत**]**वेषाभरणं** हि राजानं सुखम् उपसर्पिष्यन्त्य् अर्थिनः । अथ वायम् अस्यादृष्टप्रयोजन एव नियतशास्त्रस्यार्थवत्त्वाय । यत एवं **पश्येत् कार्याणि कार्यिणाम्** अर्थिनाम्, न स्वयमुत्पाद्यकार्याणि, ये[षु न शास्त्रोप]देशस्य सामर्थ्यं दृष्टम् । यतो ऽयम् अर्थिविषयो व्यवहारदर्शनोपदेश इत्य् गम्यते । यतो ऽयम् अर्थिविषयो व्यवहारदर्शनोपदेश इति गम्यते । एवं च सत्य् अविधित्वं समर्थ्[इत्]अं भवति । इतरथा हि परिग्रहवत्स्व् अन्येषूपदेशस्य परिसंख्या [न स्यात् । न] चैकस्योपदेशस्योभयत्र सामर्थ्यम् अस्ति, एकार्थत्वाद् वाक्यस्य ।  एवं च स्वपरिग्रहे ब्राहणादीनां (?) व्यवहारदर्शनम् अप्रतिषिद्धं भवति । ननु च **कार्यिणां [कार्याणी**ति अर्थिनाम् इति] तेन वक्ष्यति "नोत्पादयेत् स्वयं कार्यम्" इति तदनुवाद एवायम् अस्वार्थः प्रसङ्गत इह विज्ञेयः; अथ वा भवत्व् अस्येह स्वार्थ उपदेश उत्तरत्र त्व् अनुवादो विशेषार्थः, "नाप्य् अस्य पुरुष" इति ॥ ८.२ ॥

_यद् उक्तं "पश्येत् कार्याणि कार्यिणाम्" इति, अत्र कारणं वक्तव्यम् । अत इदम् आरभ्यते तत्कारणप्रसिद्ध्यर्थम् ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

002	There, either seated or standing, raising his right arm, without ostentation in his dress and ornaments, let him examine the business of suitors,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/003_pratyahan_deshadRShTaish.md">
<details open><summary><h3>003 प्रत्यहन् देशदृष्टैश् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

प्रत्यहं देशदृष्टैश् च  
शास्त्रदृष्टैश् च हेतुभिः ।  
अष्टादशसु मार्गेषु  
निबद्धानि पृथक् पृथक्  ॥ ८.३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/003_pratyahan_deshadRShTaish.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

[He shall look into the suits]—day after day, one by one,—falling as they do under eighteen heads,—according to principles deduced from local usage and from the scriptures.—(3)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वेणार्धेन निर्णयहेतवः कथ्यन्ते । उत्तरेण विवादपदसंख्यानिर्देशः । "पश्येत्" इति पूर्वश्लोकाद् अनुषज्यते, "कार्याणि" इति च । **प्रत्यहं** पश्येत् कार्याणि प्रतिदिवसगमने[^३९] व्यवहारनिर्णयः कर्तव्यः । **हेतुभिर्** इति । हेतुर् निर्णयसाधनम् । स च द्विविधः । प्रमाणरूपो व्यवस्थारूपश् च । तत्र प्रमाणरूपो ऽर्थनिर्णयहेतुः साक्ष्यादिः । व्यवस्थारूपो यतो ऽसत्ये वार्थनिश्चये व्यवहारः संतिष्ठते । यथा सत्यशपथ उभयानुमत एकः साक्षी यद्य् अर्थिप्रत्यर्थिभ्याम् अभ्युपगतप्रमाणभावः सभ्यैर् अपरीक्षितो ऽपि निर्णयहेतुतां प्रतिपद्यते । न त्व् अपरीक्षितस्य[^४०] पुंसो वचनाद् असत्य् आप्तत्ववेदने ऽर्थनिश्चयः[^४१] । प्राश्निकानाम् अभ्युपगमे ऽपि व्यवस्था हेतुर् भवति । 


[^४१]:
     M G J: asatyāt pūrvavad arthaniścayaḥ; I follow DK (1: 71)


[^४०]:
     M G J: ca parīkṣitasya; I follow DK (1: 71)


[^३९]:
     DK (1: 71) suggests: pratidivasaṃ gamanena

- सा च व्यवस्था द्विविधा- साधारण्य् असाधारणी च । देशभेदाश्रयभेदात् सापि द्विविधा- अविरुद्धा विरुद्धा च । अविरुद्धा — यथा केषांचिद् दाक्षिणात्यानाम् अपुत्रा स्त्री भर्तर्य् उपरते सभास्थाणुम् उपारोहति, तम् उपारूढा अधिकृतैर् परीक्षिता[^४२] कृतलक्षणा तत्क्षणान्तरं[^४३] सपिण्डेषु ऋक्थं[^४४] लभते । तथोदीचां लभ्यमानां कन्यां याचमानाय भोजनं यदि दीयते, तत "इयं तुभ्यं दत्ता" इत्य् अनुक्ते ऽपि प्रतिश्रुता भवति । विरुद्धा च — क्वचिद् देशे वसन्ते धान्यं युज्यते शरदि द्विगुणं प्रत्यादीयते । तथानुज्ञातभोग आधिर् द्विगुणे ऽपि तदुत्थधने प्रविष्ट आ मूलहिरण्यदानाद् भुज्यत एव । एषा हि "अशीतिभागं गृह्णीयात्" (म्ध् ८.१४०) "कुसीदवृद्धिर् द्वैगुण्यं नात्येति" (म्ध् ८.१५१)  इति विरुद्धा । 


[^४४]:
     M G: kṛcchraṃ


[^४३]:
     M G: tatsaivānantaraṃ; DK (1: 71) tataḥ saivānantaraṃ


[^४२]:
     M G DK (1: 71): akṣaparāhatā

- तत्र भेदाश्रया देशदृष्टहेतुशब्देनाभिहिताः । शास्त्रदृष्टास् तु हेतवः शास्त्रे पठिताः । ते च केचन शास्त्रकारैः कल्पितव्यवस्थाः, केचिद् यथावस्त्ववस्थिता अनूदिताः[^४५] । तत्र कल्पितव्यवस्था यथा- लेख्यं, यथोपभोगः, साक्षिणश् च । अनुमानं तु[^४६] वस्तुनियतं "यथा नयत्य् असृक्पातैर् मृगस्य मृगयुः पदम्" (म्ध् ८.४४) इति । यद्य् अपि सर्वं लौकिकं न शास्त्रकारवचनात्[^४७] प्रामाण्यं लभते,[^४८] तथापि[^४९] लौकिकम् एव, तस्मिन्[^५०] क्वचिच् छास्त्रम् आश्रयितव्यम् । या च यदीदृशे[^५१] चापराध इदं दिव्यं इयता च कालेन भोगः प्रमाणम् इति, लौकिकम् अपि तच् छास्त्रदृष्टम् इत्य् उक्तम् । तस्यां च व्यवस्थायां शास्त्रकाराणां मूले संभवति सा प्रमाणम् । या त्व् असंभवतन्मूला सा नादरणीया । यथा लेख्यकर्मपाठः-


[^५१]:
     J: yac cedṛśe


[^५०]:
     J omit: tasmin


[^४९]:
     M G: tathā


[^४८]:
     M G: bhavati


[^४७]:
     J: śāstrakāravacanvat


[^४६]:
     M G J omit: tu; I follow DK (1: 71)


[^४५]:
     M G J: anuditāḥ; I follow DK (1: 71)

- उभयाभ्यर्थितेनैवं मया ह्य् अमुकसूनुना ।

- लिखितं ह्य् अमुकेनैव लेखकस् तत्त्वतो लिखेत् ॥ इति । (य्ध् २.९१ )

यस्यादाव् एव लेखकः स्वनाम निवेशयेद् "इदं नामाहम् अमुष्यपुत्रो लिखामीदम्" इति, न कश्चिद् दोषः स्यत् । स ह्य् एवमर्थं नाम निवेशयति "अनेनेदं लिखितम्" इति लेखक उपलक्षितो[^५२] यथा स्याद् । यदि ह्य् असौ लेखकः प्रमाणान्तरेण प्रत्ययितो भवति ततस् तल्लिखितं प्रमाणम् । यदि चासाव् आत्मानं स्वगोत्रनाम्ना नोपलक्षयेत्, ततः कस्य प्रत्ययितता प्रमाणान्तराद् अन्विष्यताम् । अथ तु लेख्यान्तरदर्शनेनान्येन वा हेतुना विशिष्टलेखक इति प्रत्यभिज्ञानं स्याद् अनुपलक्षितो ऽपि न कश्चिद् दोषः । तत्र यदि लेखको न लिखेत् "मयेदं लिखितम्" इति, भवेद् एव तादृशं लेख्यं परिपूर्णलक्षणम् । एषा च लेखकपरीक्षा तत्रोपयुज्यते । अत्र[^५३] लेखकस्य साक्षित्वान्तर्भावो ऽन्येषां साक्षिणाम् अल्पत्वात् । यत्र त्व् अन्ये बहवः प्रत्ययिताः साक्षिणः स्वहस्तारूढाः सन्ति तत्र लेखकसंबन्धिनी प्रत्ययितता नोपयुज्यते । तथेयम् अपरा व्यवस्था ।


[^५३]:
     M G J: patra-


[^५२]:
      M G: lekhyakam upalikhitaṃ

- लिखितं लिखितेनैव साक्षिमच् चैव साक्षिभिः ।

- साक्षिभ्यो लिखितं श्रेयो लिखितेन तु साक्षिणः ॥ (न्स्म् १.१२५)

नास्याम् अपि व्यवस्थायां किंचिन् निबन्धनम् अस्ति । तथा हि द्विविधं लेख्यम्- स्वहस्तकृतं परहस्तकृतं च । परहस्तकृतम् अपि द्विविधम्- स्वहस्तलेखकलिखितम् अधिकृतलेखकलिखितम् । तद् एतत् परहस्तकृतं सर्वप्रकारं साक्ष्यात्मकम् एव, तत्र "साक्षिभ्यो लिखितम्" इति भेदानुपपत्तेः । इदं हि तस्य लक्षणम्-

- साक्षिणः स्वस्वहस्तेन पितृनामादिपूर्वकम् ।

- तत्राहम् अमुकः साक्षी लिखेयुर् इति ते समम् ॥ (य्ध् २.८९) इति ।

नाप्य् एकहस्तलिखितस्य प्रामाण्यम् इष्यते, यथैकस्य साक्षित्वे । अथायं भेदहेतुः साक्षिणो हस्तारूढास् त एव लेख्यम् इति, नानेन विशेषेण श्रेयस्त्वं भवति । प्रत्ययितता हि श्रेयस्त्वे हेतुः । सा चोभयत्रापि परीक्ष्या । तस्माद् ईदृशे लेख्ये साक्षिद्वैध्यन्यायः- "बहुत्वं परिगृह्णीयात्" (म्ध् ८.७३) इति । अधिकृतत्वम् अपि न विशेषः । परीक्षितो ऽधिक्रियत इत्य् एतत् तत्राधिक्यम् । न च सर्वे राजाधिकृताः सुपरीक्षिता भवन्ति । यदि तु निरुपधिस्[^५४] तादृसश् चेद् अत्यन्तगुणयोगात् स्याद् उपेयाद् एवासौ एक एव संवादकत्वम् । तथा हि राजाग्रहारशासनान्य् एककायस्थहस्तलिखितान्य् एव प्रमाणीभवन्ति । दातुः स्वाहस्तक्यं स्वयम् अभ्युपगमः "इयद् अस्मान् मया गृहीतम् इत्दं चास्मै दातव्यम्" इति । तत्र यदि पश्चात् ब्रूते "न गृहीतम्" इति तदा पूर्वनिबद्धं ब्रुवाणैर् जीयते । तत्र साक्षिणाम् अवसर एव नास्ति ।


[^५४]:
     M G J: nirupādhis; I follow DK (1: 72)

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च यदीयाल् लेख्याद् अभ्युपगतम् एतद् अनेनेत्य् अवगम्यते, उत्तरकालं च स एवाह "न गृहीतम्" इति, तत्रोभयोर् अभ्युपगमयोः केन हेतुना पूर्वेणोत्तरो[^५५] बाध्येत न पुनर् उत्तरेण पूर्वः[^५६] । तुल्यत्वाद् विरुद्धत्वसंशयः । ततश् च प्रमाणान्तरव्यापारणम् एव युक्तम् । 


[^५६]:
     M G J: pūrvā; I follow DK (1: 72)


[^५५]:
     M G J: pūrveṇottarā; I follow DK (1: 72)

- भवेद् एवं यदि तुल्यता स्यात् । "न गृहीतम्" इति ह्य् अभ्युपगमो लोभादिनापि संभवति । न त्व् अगृहीत्वानुन्मत्तो "गृहीतम्" इति ब्रूयात् । तत्रापि यदि ब्रूयात् "प्रतिदत्तम्" इति, लेख्यं तु न संपादितम्, असंनिधानात् प्रतिलेख्यं च न गृहीतं लेखकासंनिधानात् कार्यान्तरे ऽतिपातिनि त्वरावत्वान् नात्रास्त्य्[^५७] एव प्रमाणान्तरस्य साक्ष्यादेर् अवसरः । 


[^५७]:
     J: nāsty

- यद् अपि "लिखितं लिखितेन" इति नैषा परिभाषा वस्तुसामर्थ्यायाताम् अवगतिं बाधितुं शक्नोति । दृश्यन्ते हि धनिकहस्तगतलेख्यं[^५८] क्रमेण संशोधयन्तो न च पृष्ठे संशोधितं धनम् अभिलिखन्ति- "अद्य तावद् इदं दत्तम्, प्रातर् अन्यद् आनीयैकीकृत्योपर्य् आरोपयिष्यामि, सर्वं वा कतिपयैर् अहोभिः संशोध्य लेख्यं पाटयिष्यामि" इति । नान्यवस्तुतो संबन्धः[^५९] । धनिकेन चोपरुद्धस्यासंभवत्य् अंशमूललाभधने[^६०] संशुद्धिभागमात्रे दीयमाने कुत अयं[^६१] तत् प्रभवति "न ददाति यावत् प्रतिलेख्यं न दत्तम्" इति । यदि चैषा परिभाषा "लिखितं लिखितेनैव" इति तदा बलोपधिकृतत्वं[^६२] कथं विचार्यताम् । न हि तत्र लेख्यान्तरसंभवः । तेन यथात्र सत्य् एव लेख्ये तन्निश्चयार्थं प्रमाणान्तरं[^६३] व्यापार्यते तद्वद् अन्यत्रापि व्यापारणीयम् । यथा कश्चिद् आवेदयेत्- "अस्य[^६४] प्रययं गत्वा लेख्यं मया कृतम् अनेनोक्तः सद्यः पुण्याहकारणम्[^६५] इमां च धनमात्रां गृहाण,[^६६] श्वस् ते सर्वं दातास्मीत्य्[^६७] उक्त्वा सैव धनमात्रा दत्ता परिशिष्टं न दत्तम्" इति, तदास्त्य् एव साधकान्तरव्यापारणावसरः[^६८] । तत्र यद्य् अधमर्णस्यास्मिन् प्रकारे साक्षिणः सन्ति तदाभिहिते लेख्य आभासीकृते[^६९] श्वोदानम् उत्तमर्णेन साधनीयम् । अथ तयोर् अपि रहसि परिभाषेयम् अभूत् तदा दैव्याः क्रियाया अवसरः । अथ तु तस्याम् अपि व्यभिचरित्वाद् अनाश्वासः सत्यशपथेन व्यवस्था कार्या ।


[^६९]:
     M G: ābhāsākṛte


[^६८]:
     M G: nyāyakāntara-; DK: nyāyakārāntara-


[^६७]:
     M G: sarvadātāsmīty


[^६६]:
     M G: gṛhāṇāś ca


[^६५]:
     M G: puṇyāheturakāraṇam; DK: puṇyāhas tu kāraṇam


[^६४]:
     M G DK: nāsya


[^६३]:
     M G J: prāmāṇāntaraṃ; I follow DK (1: 72).


[^६२]:
     M G: balopādhi-


[^६१]:
     M G J: iyaṃ; I follow DK (1: 72).


[^६०]:
     DK (1: 72): samūlalābha-


[^५९]:
     J omits: nānyavastuto saṃbandhaḥ


[^५८]:
     M G: -lekhya-

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु एवं सति स्वहस्तलेख्यं प्रमाणान्तरसंवेदसापेक्षत्वाद् अप्रमाणम् एव । तत्र "विनापि साक्षिभिः सिध्येत्" (य्ध् २.९२) "स्वहस्तपरिचिह्नितम्"[^७०] (य्ध् २.९६) इति विरोधः । अनेनैव न्यायेन प्रत्यक्षं दीयमानं द्रव्यं न पश्यति । केवलं तत्समक्षं गृहीत्वा परिभाष्यते "इयद् इदम् अस्मान् मया गृहीतम्" इति । ते ऽपि साक्षिणः स्युः । तत्रापि शक्यते वक्तुम् "अस्य प्रत्ययं गत्वा प्रपन्नो[^७१] ऽहम्" इति । 


[^७१]:
     DK (1: 73): pratipanno


[^७०]:
     M G J: na svahasta-; I follow DK (1: 72).

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;उक्तम् अत्र न स्मृतिविरोधाद् वस्तुस्थितिर् आहन्तुं[^७२] शक्यते । अपि च यत्रास्य वचनस्यावसरो नास्ति तत्र प्रमाणं[^७३] भविष्यति । क्वचिन् नास्ति । यत्र चिरकालं तिष्ठति धनिकहस्ते लेख्यं यदि हि तेन[^७४] धनं दत्तम्, तदा कथम् अनेन वा नाम न मार्गितं लेख्यं न त्याजितम् इति । न हि चिरकालम् उपेक्षा[^७५] वस्तुनीदृशे[^७६] संभवति । मिथ्यावादिता त्व् अस्यानुमीयते । तथा चोक्तम्-


[^७६]:
     M G DK add: 'vaśyaṃ


[^७५]:
     M G: apekṣā


[^७४]:
     DK adds: na


[^७३]:
     M G DK: tatpramāṇaṃ


[^७२]:
     M G: ahantuṃ; DK: apahantuṃ

- सद्यस् त्र्यहाद् वा कार्येषु बलं राज्ञो निवेदयेत् । इति । 

यत्र वा भोग्यबन्धो न च भोग आम्नातो ऽपहारकालस् तत्र विप्रतिपत्तौ विनापि साक्षिभिः स्वहस्तलेख्यं न ह्य् अधमर्णा वक्तुं लभन्ते "प्रीत्या त्वयैतद् उक्तं संप्रति त्यज" इति । न च पूर्वोक्तस्य वचनस्यावसरः । कृतं लेख्यं ततो दास्यामीत्य् उक्त्वा न दत्तम् इति । यदि न दत्तं कथं बन्धभोगो मर्षितः ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु चैवं सति लेख्यसहायो भोगः प्रमाणं स्यात् । केवलस्य तु भोगस्य प्रामाण्यम् आमनन्ति । "लिखितं साक्षिणो भुक्तिः" (न्स्म् १.६५) इति । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;किम् इदं प्रत्युक्तं पर्यनुयुज्यामहे । विशिष्टकालो भोगः प्रमाणं न भोगमात्रम् । एवं हि पठ्यते "यत् किंचिद् दशवर्षाणि" (म्ध् ८.१४७), तथा "पश्यतो ऽब्रुवतो भूमेर् हानिर् विंशतिवार्षिकी" (य्ध् २.२४) इति । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कस् तर्ह्य् अस्यार्थो "लिखितं लिखितेनैव" (न्स्म् १.१२५) इति ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;व्याख्यातम् अन्यैः । कर्तृविशेषसंशये ऽनेनैतल् लिखितं न वेति, लिखितेन निश्चिततत्कर्तृकेण निश्चीयते । यत् तु साक्षिसमक्षं तत्र कृताकृतसंदेहं साक्षिभिर् हरति[^७७] । त एव तत्र प्रमाणम् । न तत्र तत्कृतलेख्यान्तरदर्शनम् उपयुज्यते । बुद्धिपूर्वेषु च ऋणादानादिषु केवलेभ्यः साक्षिभ्यो लिखितं श्रेयः । साक्षिणो हि विस्मरेयुर् अन्यतरेण वा संबन्धं गच्छेयुर् अन्यद् वा पातकस्यासाक्षित्वे हेतुम् आसादयेयुः । लेख्यं त्व् अभियोगवत आत्माधीनतया सुरक्षम् इति साक्षिभ्यः श्रेयस्त्वं तस्य । एतद् एवाह "लिखितेन तु साक्षिणः" (न्स्म् १.१२५) इति । स्वहस्तप्रतिष्ठेन विस्मृतम् अप्य् अर्थं वृत्तम् इति मन्यते । मृता वा साक्षिणस् तद्धस्तप्रत्यभिज्ञानेन[^७८] प्रमाणीभवन्ति । 


[^७८]:
     M G J: tadvastupratyabhijñānena; I follow DK.


[^७७]:
     DK: haret

<u>व्याख्यानान्तराणि</u> भर्तृयज्ञेनैव सम्यक् कृतानीति तत एवावगन्तव्यानि सर्वथा प्रमाणमूलानि । स्मृतिकारणव्यवस्थानुवर्तितव्येति[^७९] । न च स्मृतेर् एव[^८०] प्रमाणकल्पना युक्ता । न हि व्यवहारस्मृतिर् वेदमूला शक्यते वक्तुम्, सिद्धार्थरूपत्वात् प्रत्यक्षाद्यवगम्यत्वाज् जयपराजयप्रकाराणाम् । सिद्धो ह्य् अयम् अर्थः । एवं व्यवहारे जीयत इतरः, इतरो जयतीति । यद् अप्य्[^८१] अत्र लिङ्गश्रुतिः सापि "हरीतकीं भक्षयेद् आरोग्यकामः" इतिवद् अवसेया । ईदृशेषु विधिस्वरूपेषु प्रत्ययेषु द्रव्यशुद्धेः प्रसङ्गेनार्थो विवेचित इति न पुनः प्रयतामहे ।   
**अष्टादशसु मार्गेषु** । मार्गो[^८२] विषयो विवादस्य । एतान् अर्थान् उद्दिश्य पुरुषाः प्रायेण विवदन्ते । निबद्धानि[^८३] कार्याणि प्रयोजनान्य् अर्थसिद्धय इति यावत् । तान्य् उत्तरत्र दर्शयिष्यामः । **पृथक् पृथक्**, प्रादान्यम् एतेषाम् आह । एतानि प्रयेकं प्रयोजनानि[^८४] न पुनः परस्परम् अन्तर्भवन्ति । यथान्यान्य् अनुषङ्गादिष्व् अन्तर्भवन्ति । नैवम् एतानि[^८५] । अनुषक्तानि तु सहस्रशः सन्ति ॥ ८.३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The first half of the verse describes the means of forming a decision,
and the second mentions the number of the heads of dispute.

The verb ‘*shall look into*’ of the preceding verse has to be construed
with the present verse,—as also the noun ‘*the suits*’; the full
sentence being ‘day after day he shall look into the suits’; *i.e*.,
every day he shall decide cases.

‘*According* *to* *principles*.’—‘Principles’ are the means of coining
to a decision; and they are of two kinds—(l) in the shape of evidence
and (2) in the shape of custom. The means leading to decisions that are
in the shape of ‘evidence’ are in the form of witnesses and so forth;
and those in the form of rules are such as—(*a*) ‘the investigation of a
suit can be regarded as complete only when precise decision has been
arrived at regarding its subject-matter.’ A single witness, who is true
to his oath, and who has been cited by both parties, who have also
vouched for his veracity,—even though he may not have been examined by
the members of the court,—becomes a reliable means of arriving at the
right decision; but no decision can ho arrived at on the strength of the
words of any such single person as is not known to be truthful and has
not been examined, as there is in the former ease; and hence such a
single witness cannot he regarded as helping the forming of a decision,
even though the persons investigating the case may be agreed upon it.

*Customs* also are of two kinds—*general* and *special*. These again are
of two kinds—*congruous* and *incongruous*, in reference to places and
times. As an instance of the ‘Congruous’ custom we have (*a*) the case
where among certain people of the South, a childless woman, on the death
of her huśand, goes up to the pillar of the court of justice, and while
there, if, on being examined by the officers of the court, she is found
to be untainted and possessed of the necessary qualifications, she
obtains her inheritance;—or (*b*) the case where among the people of the
North, if food is given to a person seeking for a bride, then she
becomes *betrothed* to him even though the actual words ‘I shall give
her to you’ may not he uttered. And as an instance of the ‘incongruous’
rule, we have (*a*) the case where in some countries grains are lent out
during the Spring, and double the quantity is realised during the
Autumn,—or (*b*) when an article is mortgaged on the understanding that
it shall be enjoyed by the mortgagee, even if the total amount of debt
accruing become double of the price of that article, and the total from
the very beginning is paid in gold, yet the enjoyment of it remains
unmolested;—now all this is ‘incongruous,’ being incompatible with the
law that ‘the interest shall accumulate to only 80 per cent.’
(Yājñavalkya, *Vyarahāra, 37*), and that ‘the accumulated interest shall
not exceed the double of the principal’ (Manu, 8.151).

These customs based upon the nature of the countries affected are what
are mentioned in the text by the words ‘*principles based upon local
usage*’; and as regards the ‘*principles based upon scriptures*,’ these
are declared in the scriptures themselves. Of these latter some are
rules that have been propounded by the writers themselves, while others
only codify the actually existing state of things. As an instance of the
rule propounded by the writers we have—(a) ‘Facts are ascertained in
accordance with written documents, possession and witnesses,’—as says
manu (8.41) ‘Just as the hunter infers the position of the prey by means
of the drops of blood (so should the king infer the facts of a case).’
Though no worldly usage can be regarded as authoritative as against the
word of scripture-writers, yet in certain cases it becomes necessary to
have recourse to the words of ordinary men of the world; *e.g*., ‘under
such and such conditions such and such an ordeal should be had recourse
to,’ ‘weight is to be attached to possession lasting for such a time.’
Such rules, even though based upon ordinary usage, are included under
‘*principles based upon scriptures*’ But among such rules, those are to
be regarded as authoritative which are found to have some support in the
scriptural texts; while those that are found to be without such support
are not to be so accepted. For instance, there is the rule regarding the
order of words in documents—‘By me, entreated by both parties, who am
the son of so and so, this has been written by so and so—thus exactly
shall the scribe write down’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*, 88). In reality
however, there would be no harm if the scribe were to write down his own
name first—‘I so and so, the son of so and so, am writing this.’ Because
the only purpose for which he writes all this is with a view to show
that the document has been written by such and such a person; so that so
long as the name of the scribe is put down, there is nothing
objectionable in it. If the scribe is known, from other sources, to be a
trustworthy person, then what is written by him is regarded as reliable;
so that if he were to omit the name of his family, and thus fail to
indicate precisely who he is, whose reliability would the persons
concerned investigate, on the basis of other sources of information? But
if from his writing, or by some other means, the writer be recognised as
a particular well-known scribe, then there would be no harm even if he
were to omit his indicative characteristics. In this case, even if the
scribe were to omit to write that ‘this has been written by me, so and
so,’ there would be enough to indicate who the writer is. And it is in
such cases that the examination of the scribe comes useful; and he
becomes counted among ‘witnesses,’ specially when there are few other
witnesses. When however there are many trustworthy witnesses ready at
hand, there is not much use in investigating the trustworthiness of the
scribe.

Similarly there is another rule—‘Documentary evidence is rebutted by
documentary evidence, and witnesses (oral evidence) by witnesses;
documentary evidence is superior to witnesses; hence witnesses are
rebutted by documentary evidence.’ (*Nārada*, 1.145). For this rule also
there is no foundation. For ‘documentary evidence’ is of two kinds: (1)
written by the party himself, and (2) written by another person. The
latter again is of two kinds—(*a*) written by a scribe who volunteers to
do the writing, and (*b*) written by an authorised scribe. The document
written by another person again is, in every way, of the nature of a
witness; so that there is no ground for the distinction made by the
rule, in the words ‘documentary evidence is superior to witnesses,’
specially because the ‘witness’ has been thus defined (by Yājñavalkya,
*Vyavahāra*, 87)—‘The witnesses shall, with their own hands, write down
their names, preceded by the names of their father, adding that I, so
and so, am a witness.’ Similarly, no reliability attaches to what has
been written by a single man, just as it does not attach to a single
witness. It might be argued that it is only when ‘witnesses’ set down
their hands to something that they become ‘documentary evidence.’ But
this difference cannot make the one ‘superior’ to the other. Because
*trustworthiness* is the only ground for ‘superiority’; and this
trustworthiness is equally yet to be examined in both cases. It is for
this reason that in a case when there is a conflict between the two
kinds of evidence, the judge should accept that which is the more
numerous of the two. ‘Being authorised’ also cannot be regarded as a
ground of distinction; because even so, the ‘superiority’ could only
consist in the fact that it is only one who has been tested that is
‘authorised’; but as a matter of fact, all persons ‘authorised’ by the
King are not necessarily thoroughly ‘tested.’ If some one happened to be
possessed, of extremely high qualifications and were absolutely free
from all defects, then he, even alone, could be accepted as sufficient
corroboration. As for instance, the deeds of land-grants bestowed by the
King are accepted as authoritative, even though written by a single
*Kāyastha* scribe. In a case where there is documentary evidence written
by the hand of the person who is not paying a debt, wherein he admits
that ‘I have received so much from this person, and so much has to be
paid to him,’—if he should happen to deny it and say ‘I have not
received anything from him,’—then the party producing the aforesaid
document wins the case outright, and there is no occasion for the
appearance of any witnesses at all.

“It is only on the strength of the man’s writing that it is concluded
that the debt is admitted by him,—and subsequently also the same man
asserts, that he has not received anything; now between these two
assertions, on what grounds is the latter rejects in favour of the
former, and not the former in that or the latter,—both of them being
equally open to doubt, by reason of mutual contradiction? In fact under
such circumstances it is only right that other kinds of evidence should
he called in.”

This would be so, if there were equality (between the two assertions).
As a matter of fact, however, the assertion ‘I have not received
anything’ may he due to the man’s avarice and such other causes; whereas
the assertion ‘I have received such and such a thing’ could never he
made by any sane person without having actually received it. In the case
in question, even if the man were to say that he has repaid the debt,
but did not obtain the written acquittance receipt, either because a
writer was not at hand, or because being engaged in some other business
he was in a hurry,—even so there would be no need and occasion for the
calling of any further evidence, in the shape of witnesses, etc.

As regards the dictum quoted above (from Nārada), it cannot set aside a
conviction derived from the very nature of things.

For instance, it is often found that people go on repaying debts due to
rich persons, and yet do not have the payments noted on the back of the
document, the idea in the man’s mind being either that ‘so much I have
paid to-day, and tomorrow I shall bring in more and then have the total
sum entered at the same time,’ or that ‘in a few days I shall repay the
entire amount and then have the document torn off’;—but when pressed by
the rich creditor, he may be unable to clear off the entire debt, and
the only amount paid remains what had been on the first day, the
creditor would deny even that payment on the ground that the receipt was
not given;—now in this case if the court were to insist upon the dictum
that ‘documentary evidence can be rebutted only by documentary
evidence,’—then how could it take into consideration at all the
possibility of force or fraud (on the part of the influential creditor)?
for there is no possibility of any documentary evidence; and in this
case, even though there is documentary evidence on one side, yet, for
the purpose of coining to a right conclusion, other forms of evidence
are called in; and the same could be done in other cases also. For
instance, in a certain case, one of the parties (the debtor) might
say—‘trusting this man, I executed this deed for the entire sum, and the
creditor told me that I may receive a part of the sum that day, as for
certain reasons he was not in a position to pay the whole sum then, and
that he would pay the balance the next day; but the sum paid on the
first day was all that he gave me, and the balance was never paid’; and
in this case there is certainly an occasion for the calling in of other
kinds of evidence. And if the debtor can produce witnesses in
corroboration of his statement, then the document (produced by the
creditor) becomes impugned, and it becomes necessary for the creditor to
prove that he did pay the balance the next day. If the conversation
between the parties (regarding the part payment) were held in private
(and there be no witnesses to corroborate the statements one way or the
other),—then there comes the occasion for having recourse to ordeals. If
however there be no full confidence in ordeals,—on the ground of these
being not always infallible,—then decision should he arrived at by means
of oaths.

“If such be the case, then the document written by the man’s own hand
becomes untrustworthy, since it stands in need of corroboration by other
kinds of evidence. And this is contrary to the dictum that ‘even without
witnesses, what is written by the man’s own hand should be conclusive
evidence.’ It is on the analogy of this same reasoning that in a case
where a person has not seen the sum being actually paid by the creditor,
but in his presence the debtor has admitted that ‘such and such an
amount has been received by me from him,’—such a person is accepted as a
real ‘witness’; though in this ease it is open to the debtor to say ‘it
was through my trust in the man that I admitted the payment.’”

This argument we have already answered by saying that mere
incompatibility with a *Smṛti-text* cannot set aside the real facts of
the case. In certain cases the aforesaid statement (of the debtor—that
‘I repaid a certain sum but did not have it entered on the back of the
document’) could be wholly out of place; and in such cases, the document
would certainly be accepted as reliable evidence. For instance, in a
case where the document has remained in the creditor’s hands for a long
time, the question naturally arises if the debtor really repaid the
debt, why did he not seek out the document and receive it back; such a
matter cannot be neglected or overlooked for such a long time; and from
this it is inferred that what the debtor states is a lie.’ It is in view
of this that it has been laid down that ‘if there has been any wrongful
force used in regard to any business, one should report it to the King
either at once or within three days.’ Again, in a case where there is
mortgage, but the exact period of the mortgage is not definitely fixed,
and dispute arises on that account, if there is a document written by
the debtor, but without witnesses,—it is not open to the debtor to
assert—‘you said this (made this condition) at the time through your
love (for the thing), but now please give up to me the mortgaged
article’; nor would this be an occasion for his making the statement
referred to above—*viz*., ‘I executed the deed, the man said he would
give me the sum mentioned therein, but he never actually gave it to me’;
because if the debt was not advanced, why did he permit the creditor to
retain and make use of the mortgaged article?

“If such be the case, then the evidence in the case would consist of the
said possession accompanied by the document; while what the writers on
law declare is that possession by *itself* is sufficient evidence; as
assorted in such texts as—

‘Documents, witnesses, possession, etc., etc.’ (Yājñavalkya,
*Vyavahāra*, 22).”

Why is this objection urged against us, when we have already answered
it: What is accepted as evidence is possession *for a definite period of
time*, and not mere possession. What the texts state is—‘Whatever is
retained *for ten years*, etc.’ (manu, 8.147), and ‘One loses possession
of a landed property, if *for twenty years* he perceives and speaks of
it as being actually possessed by another person’ (Yājñavalkya,
*Vyavahāra*, 24).

“What then is the exact meaning of the dictum that ‘documentary is
rebutted only by documentary evidence?’”

Others have explained this to mean (*a*) that when there is a doubt
regarding the writer of a certain document, as to whether or not it has
been written by a certain person, this can he ascertained only with the
help of another writing obtained from that person;—(*b*) that where the
deed has been written before a certain witness, the doubt as to whether
or not it has been written by the man can be removed only by means of
witnesses; as the latter are the only evidence possible in the case; so
that in this case there is no use in producing another writing of the
man;—(*c*) that in a case where the payment of the debt is being
intentionally withheld, documentary evidence is superior to mere
witnesses; because it is possible for witnesses to forget things, or to
collude with one party or the other, or become tainted with some defect
which would disqualify them as proper witnesses; as for the document on
the other hand, this would he in charge of the plaintiff and as such
perfectly safe; and thus it is that documentary evidence is superior to
witnesses. This is what is meant by the dictum that ‘witnesses are
rebutted by documentary evidence’; because even though the man may have
forgotten a certain fact, if he sees some writing of his own bearing
testimony to it, he is convinced of its being true; or when the
witnesses are all dead, if their *writing* is recognised, it is accepted
as evidence.

Other explanations have been supplied by *Bhartṛyajña*, and may be
learnt from his own work.

Though it is true that in all cases Smṛti-texts form the source of
authority, yet rules have to be laid down for meeting special cases; and
it cannot be right to depend entirely on Smṛti-texts; specially because
it cannot be said that the Smṛti-texts bearing upon legal proceedings
are all based upon the Veda; because the winning or losing of cases
deals with *well-accomplished* things (while the Veda bears upon things
*to be accomplished*) and is amenable to Perception and other forms of
cognition;—*e.g*., that ‘one who acts like this is defeated, while he
who acts thus wins’ is a well-accomplished fact. Even the few
indications of these that are found in the Veda are to be regarded as
being on the same footing as the assertion—‘One desiring freedom from
disease should eat the *Harītakī* (which only describes a perceptible
fact). the exact significance of such Injunctive Vedic passages has been
discussed by us in the section on the ‘Purification of things’ (under
Discourse 6, Verse 110 *et seq*.); hence we are not going to do the same
thing over and again.

The objects of dispute fall within eighteen ‘heads’; it is only with
regard to these that disputes arise among men. Mutually nugatory acts
are not conducive to the fulfilment of any useful purpose,—as we are
going to show later on.

Each of these eighteen ‘heads’ is important by itself; as each by itself
becomes the object of dispute, and no one of them is included in any
other. The various ramifications of these are included under each head;
if these ramifications were to be enumerated separately, there would be
thousands of them.—(3)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vināpi sākṣibhiḥ etc*.’—(Medhātithi, p. 793, l. 24)—This is a clear
reference to Yājñavalkya (Vyavahāra, 89).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 18), and again
on p. 31, in support of the view that the king shall decide cases
relating to all the eighteen points of dispute, on the basis of local
customs and also of ordeals and other methods prescribed by the
scriptures;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 2a);—in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Vyavahāra, p. 57);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (3a), which has the following
notes:—‘*Deśadṛṣṭa hetu*’ are those special means of coming to a
decision which are effective in the place concerned,—of the custom
obtaining among the people of the North and those of the Central land,
of feeding the person who comes to ask for the hand of a girl, which
*feeding* means a distinct promise to marry the girl,—‘*śāstradṛṣṭa
hetu*’ stands for *witnesses and the rest*;—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, p. 4a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (II. 19-24).—‘His administration of justice shall be regulated
by the Veda, the institutes of the sacred law, the subsidiary sciences
and the Purāṇa; the local laws, the customs of castes and families—which
arc not opposed to the sacred laws—have also authority. Cultivators,
traders, herdsmen, money-lenders and artisans have the authority to lay
down rules for their respective classes. Having learnt the state of
affairs from those who have authority to speak, the King shall give the
decision. Reasoning is a means for getting at truth; coming to a
conclusion through that, he shall decide properly.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1.17).—‘Manu has declared that the peculiar laws of
countries, castes and families may be followed in the absence of
revealed texts.’

Do. (16.4-5).—‘Let him reason properly regarding an offence; he who
reasons properly regarding an offence, in accordance with the sum of the
science of the first two castes is equitable towards all living beings.’

*Kātyāyana* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 31).—‘The King shall decide suits
according to the Śāstras; where there are no texts to guide him, he
shall decide in accordance with local custom.’

*Bṛhaspati* (1.23).—‘Having entered the Court in the forenoon, together
with elders, ministers, and attendants, he should try causes and listen
to expositions of the Purāṇas, Law-codes and Rules of Polity.’

Do. (1.33).—‘People who arc ignorant of the customs of the country,
unbelievers, despisers of the sacred books, insane, irrate, avaricious
or diseased should not he consulted in the decision of causes.’

Do. (27.24).—‘Such customs as are not opposed to the laws of the country
and castes or other corporations—the King should establish in accordance
with the sacred law.’

*Nārada* (3.5).—‘The members of the royal court of justice must be
acquainted with the sacred law and with rules of precedence,—noble, not
avaricious and impartial towards friend and foe.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Rājadharma, 215.50).—‘He shall attend upon Brāhmaṇas
versed in the Veda and the sciences.’

*Agnipurāṇa* (234.7-9).—‘He shall then see the preceptor and having
received his blessings, enter the Court; therein he shall see the
Brāhmaṇas, Ministers and Councillors; and then proceed to try the
law-suits, holding consultations with the Councillors.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra).—‘Suits shall be decided by the
king or by the learned Brāhmaṇa appointed as Judge.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**अष्टादशसु मार्गेषु** व्यवहारस्थानेष्व् ऋणादानादिषु वक्ष्यमाणेषु **पृथक् पृथङ् निबद्धानि**, देशाचारव्यवस्थया कर्षकवणिक्पशुपालादिषु धर्मेण, शास्त्रव्यवस्थया च शास्त्रोक्तैर् **हेतुभिः** साक्षिशपथादिभिः **प्रत्यहम्** अग्लायमानो राजा **पश्येत् कार्याणि कार्यिणाम्** । यद्य् अपि लौकिकान्य् अपि शास्त्रोक्तानि लिङ्गानि "बाह्यैर् विभावयेल् लिङ्गैः," "तथानुमाने[न] नयेद् धर्मस्य नृपतिः पदम्" इत्य् एवमादीनि, तथापीदं लौकिकप्रमाणानुवादि । शास्त्रलक्षणम् तु प्रमाणं शाक्षिशपथादि । यद्य् अपि च लौकिकप्रमाणानुवाद इह शास्त्रे ऽस्ति कुतश्चित् कारणात्, तथापि शास्त्रं लोकम् एव प्रमाणीकरोति केषुचित् कार्येषु । तथा च वक्ष्यति "समुद्रयानकुशला देशहालार्थदर्शिणः" इत्य् एवमादि । अतः पृथग्**देश**ग्रहणं न्याय्यम् ॥ ८.३ ॥

_तानि च व्यवहारवसूनीमानि निर्दिश्यन्ते ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

003	Daily (deciding) one after another (all cases) which fall under the eighteen titles (of the law) according to principles drawn from local usages. and from the Institutes of the sacred law.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/004_teShAm_Adyam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>004 तेषाम् आद्यम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

तेषाम् आद्यम् ऋणादानं  
निक्षेपो ऽस्वामिविक्रयः ।  
सम्भूय च समुत्थानं  
दत्तस्याऽनपकर्म च  ॥ ८.४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/004_teShAm_Adyam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

पाठक्रमापेक्षम् ऋणादानस्याद्यत्वं प्राथम्यम् । अथ वा मुख्यम् आद्यम् । अनेन हि वनवासिनो ऽपि स्पृश्यन्ते । ऋणादानानुषक्तम् अनृणादानम् एव च । यथा "ऋणं ते मया दत्तं शुद्धिलेख्यं प्रयच्छ" इत्यादि । नैतद् ऋणादानम्, अनुक्तं तु तत्रेति तद् व्यपदेश्यम् । तथा 

- ऋणं देयम् अदेयं च येन यत्र यथा च यत् । 

- दानग्रहणधर्माश् च । (न्स्म् १.१) इति । 

तत्र देयम् ऋणं स्वकृतं पितृकृतं च यय च ऋक्थं हरेत् । अदेयं स्वक्र्तं द्विगुणाद् अधिकं पितृकृतं च द्यूतादिभागेनेति पुत्रण् भर्त्रा पित्रा चेति । तथा, 

- न स्त्री पतिकृतं दद्याद् ऋणं पुत्रकृतं तथा ।

- अभ्युपेताद् ऋते यद् वा सह पत्या कृतं भवेत् ॥ (न्स्म् १.१३)

यद्य् अपि देयम् इत्य् अत्रैतद् अन्तर्भूतं तथापि द्यूतादिकृतं विशेषानपेक्षं स्वरूपतो देयम्, इदं तु कर्तृनियमाद् इति गोबलीवर्दवद् भवति चेद् भेदो यावद् इति द्वैगुण्यपर्यन्तं तत्रापि भेदः पूर्ववत् । "यत्र" इति पाठे देशकालग्रहणम् । यत्रैव गृहीतं तत्रैव देयम् । सत्यां धनिकेच्छायां देशान्तरे ऽपि । सति संभवे कालो ऽपि । शरद्य् अनिच्छेत्त्य् उक्तम्[^८६] । "ग्रैष्मे वा सत्सु सस्येषु यदा वास्य धनागमं मन्येत" इति । "यथा" सति संभवे सर्वम् । असति कश्चिद् अंशो यावत् क्रमेण संशुद्धम् इति । सर्वभावेन[^८७] परिक्षीणेन "कर्मणापि समम्" (म्ध् ८.१७७) इति । "दानग्रहणधर्माः" इति साक्षिलेख्यादयः ।   

**पारुष्ये दण्डवाचिके** इति । दण्डश् च वाक् च दण्डवाचं "द्वन्द्वाच् चुदषहान्तात्" (पाण् ५.४.१०६) इति समासान्तस् तद् अस्यास्तीति "अत इनि ठनौ" (पान् ५.२.११५) इति ठन् । **स्त्रीपुंधर्म** इति । स्त्रीसहितः पुमान् इति शाकपार्थिवादिवत् समासः । स्त्री च पुमांश् चेति विग्रहे स्त्रीपुंसस्हर्म इति स्यात् ॥ ८.४–६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पाठक्रमापेक्षम् ऋणादानस्याद्यत्वं प्राथम्यम् । अथ वा मुख्यम् आद्यम् । अनेन हि वनवासिनो ऽपि स्पृश्यन्ते । ऋणादानानुषक्तम् अनृणादानम् एव च । यथा "ऋणं ते मया दत्तं शुद्धिलेख्यं प्रयच्छ" इत्यादि । नैतद् ऋणादानम्, अनुक्तं तु तत्रेति तद् व्यपदेश्यम् । तथा 

- ऋणं देयम् अदेयं च येन यत्र यथा च यत् । 

- दानग्रहणधर्माश् च । (न्स्म् १.१) इति । 

तत्र देयम् ऋणं स्वकृतं पितृकृतं च यय च ऋक्थं हरेत् । अदेयं स्वक्र्तं द्विगुणाद् अधिकं पितृकृतं च द्यूतादिभागेनेति पुत्रण् भर्त्रा पित्रा चेति । तथा, 

- न स्त्री पतिकृतं दद्याद् ऋणं पुत्रकृतं तथा ।

- अभ्युपेताद् ऋते यद् वा सह पत्या कृतं भवेत् ॥ (न्स्म् १.१३)

यद्य् अपि देयम् इत्य् अत्रैतद् अन्तर्भूतं तथापि द्यूतादिकृतं विशेषानपेक्षं स्वरूपतो देयम्, इदं तु कर्तृनियमाद् इति गोबलीवर्दवद् भवति चेद् भेदो यावद् इति द्वैगुण्यपर्यन्तं तत्रापि भेदः पूर्ववत् । "यत्र" इति पाठे देशकालग्रहणम् । यत्रैव गृहीतं तत्रैव देयम् । सत्यां धनिकेच्छायां देशान्तरे ऽपि । सति संभवे कालो ऽपि । शरद्य् अनिच्छेत्त्य् उक्तम्[^८६] । "ग्रैष्मे वा सत्सु सस्येषु यदा वास्य धनागमं मन्येत" इति । "यथा" सति संभवे सर्वम् । असति कश्चिद् अंशो यावत् क्रमेण संशुद्धम् इति । सर्वभावेन[^८७] परिक्षीणेन "कर्मणापि समम्" (म्ध् ८.१७७) इति । "दानग्रहणधर्माः" इति साक्षिलेख्यादयः ।   

**पारुष्ये दण्डवाचिके** इति । दण्डश् च वाक् च दण्डवाचं "द्वन्द्वाच् चुदषहान्तात्" (पाण् ५.४.१०६) इति समासान्तस् तद् अस्यास्तीति "अत इनि ठनौ" (पान् ५.२.११५) इति ठन् । **स्त्रीपुंधर्म** इति । स्त्रीसहितः पुमान् इति शाकपार्थिवादिवत् समासः । स्त्री च पुमांश् चेति विग्रहे स्त्रीपुंसस्हर्म इति स्यात् ॥ ८.४–६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

पाठक्रमापेक्षम् ऋणादानस्याद्यत्वं प्राथम्यम् । अथ वा मुख्यम् आद्यम् । अनेन हि वनवासिनो ऽपि स्पृश्यन्ते । ऋणादानानुषक्तम् अनृणादानम् एव च । यथा "ऋणं ते मया दत्तं शुद्धिलेख्यं प्रयच्छ" इत्यादि । नैतद् ऋणादानम्, अनुक्तं तु तत्रेति तद् व्यपदेश्यम् । तथा 

- ऋणं देयम् अदेयं च येन यत्र यथा च यत् । 

- दानग्रहणधर्माश् च । (न्स्म् १.१) इति । 

तत्र देयम् ऋणं स्वकृतं पितृकृतं च यय च ऋक्थं हरेत् । अदेयं स्वक्र्तं द्विगुणाद् अधिकं पितृकृतं च द्यूतादिभागेनेति पुत्रण् भर्त्रा पित्रा चेति । तथा, 

- न स्त्री पतिकृतं दद्याद् ऋणं पुत्रकृतं तथा ।

- अभ्युपेताद् ऋते यद् वा सह पत्या कृतं भवेत् ॥ (न्स्म् १.१३)

यद्य् अपि देयम् इत्य् अत्रैतद् अन्तर्भूतं तथापि द्यूतादिकृतं विशेषानपेक्षं स्वरूपतो देयम्, इदं तु कर्तृनियमाद् इति गोबलीवर्दवद् भवति चेद् भेदो यावद् इति द्वैगुण्यपर्यन्तं तत्रापि भेदः पूर्ववत् । "यत्र" इति पाठे देशकालग्रहणम् । यत्रैव गृहीतं तत्रैव देयम् । सत्यां धनिकेच्छायां देशान्तरे ऽपि । सति संभवे कालो ऽपि । शरद्य् अनिच्छेत्त्य् उक्तम्[^८६] । "ग्रैष्मे वा सत्सु सस्येषु यदा वास्य धनागमं मन्येत" इति । "यथा" सति संभवे सर्वम् । असति कश्चिद् अंशो यावत् क्रमेण संशुद्धम् इति । सर्वभावेन[^८७] परिक्षीणेन "कर्मणापि समम्" (म्ध् ८.१७७) इति । "दानग्रहणधर्माः" इति साक्षिलेख्यादयः ।   

**पारुष्ये दण्डवाचिके** इति । दण्डश् च वाक् च दण्डवाचं "द्वन्द्वाच् चुदषहान्तात्" (पाण् ५.४.१०६) इति समासान्तस् तद् अस्यास्तीति "अत इनि ठनौ" (पान् ५.२.११५) इति ठन् । **स्त्रीपुंधर्म** इति । स्त्रीसहितः पुमान् इति शाकपार्थिवादिवत् समासः । स्त्री च पुमांश् चेति विग्रहे स्त्रीपुंसस्हर्म इति स्यात् ॥ ८.४–६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

पाठक्रमापेक्षम् ऋणादानस्याद्यत्वं प्राथम्यम् । अथ वा मुख्यम् आद्यम् । अनेन हि वनवासिनो ऽपि स्पृश्यन्ते । ऋणादानानुषक्तम् अनृणादानम् एव च । यथा "ऋणं ते मया दत्तं शुद्धिलेख्यं प्रयच्छ" इत्यादि । नैतद् ऋणादानम्, अनुक्तं तु तत्रेति तद् व्यपदेश्यम् । तथा 

- ऋणं देयम् अदेयं च येन यत्र यथा च यत् । 

- दानग्रहणधर्माश् च । (न्स्म् १.१) इति । 

तत्र देयम् ऋणं स्वकृतं पितृकृतं च यय च ऋक्थं हरेत् । अदेयं स्वक्र्तं द्विगुणाद् अधिकं पितृकृतं च द्यूतादिभागेनेति पुत्रण् भर्त्रा पित्रा चेति । तथा, 

- न स्त्री पतिकृतं दद्याद् ऋणं पुत्रकृतं तथा ।

- अभ्युपेताद् ऋते यद् वा सह पत्या कृतं भवेत् ॥ (न्स्म् १.१३)

यद्य् अपि देयम् इत्य् अत्रैतद् अन्तर्भूतं तथापि द्यूतादिकृतं विशेषानपेक्षं स्वरूपतो देयम्, इदं तु कर्तृनियमाद् इति गोबलीवर्दवद् भवति चेद् भेदो यावद् इति द्वैगुण्यपर्यन्तं तत्रापि भेदः पूर्ववत् । "यत्र" इति पाठे देशकालग्रहणम् । यत्रैव गृहीतं तत्रैव देयम् । सत्यां धनिकेच्छायां देशान्तरे ऽपि । सति संभवे कालो ऽपि । शरद्य् अनिच्छेत्त्य् उक्तम्[^८६] । "ग्रैष्मे वा सत्सु सस्येषु यदा वास्य धनागमं मन्येत" इति । "यथा" सति संभवे सर्वम् । असति कश्चिद् अंशो यावत् क्रमेण संशुद्धम् इति । सर्वभावेन[^८७] परिक्षीणेन "कर्मणापि समम्" (म्ध् ८.१७७) इति । "दानग्रहणधर्माः" इति साक्षिलेख्यादयः ।   

**पारुष्ये दण्डवाचिके** इति । दण्डश् च वाक् च दण्डवाचं "द्वन्द्वाच् चुदषहान्तात्" (पाण् ५.४.१०६) इति समासान्तस् तद् अस्यास्तीति "अत इनि ठनौ" (पान् ५.२.११५) इति ठन् । **स्त्रीपुंधर्म** इति । स्त्रीसहितः पुमान् इति शाकपार्थिवादिवत् समासः । स्त्री च पुमांश् चेति विग्रहे स्त्रीपुंसस्हर्म इति स्यात् ॥ ८.४–६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

004	Of those (titles) the first is the non-payment of debts, (then follow), (2) deposit and pledge, (3) sale without ownership, (4) concerns among partners, and (5) resumption of gifts,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/005_vetanasyaiva_chAdAnam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>005 वेतनस्यैव चादानम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वेतनस्यैव चादानं  
संविदश् च व्यतिक्रमः ।  
क्रय-विक्रयानुशयो  
विवादः स्वामि-पालयोः  ॥ ८.५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/005_vetanasyaiva_chAdAnam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

005	(6) Non-payment of wages, (7) non-performance of agreements, (8) rescission of sale and purchase, (9) disputes between the owner (of cattle) and his servants,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/006_sImAvivAdadharmash_cha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>006 सीमाविवादधर्मश् च ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सीमाविवादधर्मश् च  
पारुष्ये दण्डवाचिके ।  
स्तेयं च साहसं चैव  
स्त्रीसङ्ग्रहणम् एव च  ॥ ८.६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/006_sImAvivAdadharmash_cha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

006	(10) Disputes regarding boundaries, (11) assault and (12) defamation, (13) theft, (14) robbery and violence, (15) adultery,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/007_strI-pundharmo_vibhAgash.md">
<details open><summary><h3>007 स्त्री-पुन्धर्मो विभागश् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

स्त्री-पुन्धर्मो विभागश् च  
द्यूतम् आह्वय एव च ।  
पदान्य् अष्टादशैतानि  
व्यवहारस्थिताव् इह  ॥ ८.७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/007_strI-pundharmo_vibhAgash.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Of these the first is (1) Non-payment of Debt; (then) (2) Deposits, (3) Selling without ownership, (4) Joint concerns, (5) Non-delivery of what has been given away,—[4]—(6) Non-payment of wages, (7) Breach of Contract, (8) Recision of Sale and Purchase, (9) Dispute between the Owner and the Keeper,—[5]—(10) Disputes regarding Boundaries, (11) and (12) Assault, physical and verbal, (13) Theft, (14) Violence, (15) Adultery,—[6]—(16) Duties of man and wife, (17) Partition, and (18) Gambling and Betting;—these are the eighteen topics that form the basis of law-suits.—(4-7)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 8.4-7)  
**

‘Non-payment of debt’ is regarded as ‘*first*,’ foremost, only by reason
of the order in which the several heads are found mentioned in the
law-books. Or ‘*first*’ may mean ‘the most important,’—its ‘importance’
lying in the fact that it affects even those who live in the forests.

Connected with the ‘non-payment of debt’ is also the subject of the
‘non-granting of the acquittance-receipt’; when, for instance, the
debtor says to the creditor ‘I have repaid your debt, now let me have
the acquittance receipt.’ This ‘nongranting of the acquittance-receipt’
is not the same as the ‘non-payment of debt’; but though not directly
denoted by that term, it is implied by it.

What are included under the head of ‘non-payment of debt’ are thus
enumerated (by *Nārada*, 3.17)—‘What debt is payable and what
non-payable,—when, how and to what extent?—as also the methods of
delivery and receipt.’

Now ‘payable debt’ is that contracted by one’s self, that, contracted by
his father, and by one whose property he inherits.

‘Non-payable debt’ is that contracted by one’s self, if (along with the
interest) it exceeds the double of the principal, or that contracted by
his father in gambling, etc.,’ as declared in the text—‘That contracted
by the son, or husband or father, etc.’ (Says *Nārada*, 3.17)—‘A woman
may not pay the debt contracted by her husband, or by her son, unless
she has promised to pay it, or if the debt he one contracted by her
jointly with her husband.’ Though all this is included under ‘payable
debt,’ yet when it happens to be such as is contracted in gambling,
etc., then by itself, irrespective of all other peculiar circumstances,
it becomes ‘non-payable’; but all this ‘payability’ or ‘non-payability’
is in relation to the person called upon to pay; and bonce the names
‘payable’ and ‘non-payable’ may he taken as similar to the expression
‘*gobalībarda*’ (*i.e*., generally speaking, by itself, the debt is
*payable*, but under special circumstances, pertaining to the person and
the relationship to the original debtor, etc., it becomes
*non-payable*).

‘*To what extent*’ (in Nārada’s text) means—‘up to the limit of the
double of the principal’; the distinction here also being as before. If
we read ‘*yatra*’ (in Nārada’s text), this term would refer to the
*place* and *time* of payment; the idea being that the debt shall he
repaid *where* it was taken; but if the creditor so wish it, it may he
paid at another place also. The *time* of payment also should as nearly
as possible be the same. As regards time, it has been said that there is
no desire to repay debts during the Autumn, the most suitable time being
either the Summer, when the harvest has been gathered in, or whenever an
income is expected.

‘*How*’ (in Nārada’s text);—*i.e*., so far as possible, the entire debt
shall be paid; if this be not possible, then by instalments, till the
whole is cleared off; and lastly, in the event of the debtor being
entirely reduced to penury, he shall clear off the debt by service, as
declared in verso 177 below.

‘*The methods of delivery and receipt*,’—*i.e*., the signature of
witnesses, the execution of deeds and so forth.

‘*Assaults, physical and verbal*’ (*verse 6*);—the compound
‘*daṇḍavācike*’ is formed in accordance with Pāṇini 5.4.106, the final
‘*ṭhan*’ affix being added according to 5.2.115.

‘*Duties of man and wife*’ (*verse* 7);—the compound ‘*strīpumān*’ is to
be expounded as ‘*striyā sahitaḥ pumān*,’—the compound belonging to the
same class as the compound ‘*śākapārthivaḥ*.’ If it were formed as
‘*stṛī ca pumaṃśca*,’ the resultant compound would be
‘*strīpuṃsadharmaḥ*’ (according to Pāṇini 5.4.77).—(4-7)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verse 8.4)**

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā (on* 2. 5);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Vyavahāra, p. 3 b);—in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 1) which explains
‘*anapākarma*’ *as* ‘*non-delivery*’;—in *Aparārka* (p. 596);—in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 1);—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 325);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 3 b);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (12b);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 89b).

**(verse 8.5)**

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p, 596);—in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.5);—in
*Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 1), which explains ‘*anuśayaḥ*’ as
‘*paścāttāpaḥ*’, ‘revoking—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 1.)—in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 325);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 3b);—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (12b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 896).

**(verse 8.6)**

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p, 596);—in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p.
1);—in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.5);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 1);—in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 325);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 3b);—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (12b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 89b).

**(verse 8.7)**

‘*Vyavahārasthitau*’—‘Giving rise to law-suits’ (Govindarāja);—‘in
deciding law-suits’ (Nārāyaṇa),

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.5);—in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p.
1), which explains ‘*dyūta*’ as ‘gambling with inanimate objects’ and
‘*samāhvayaḥ*’ as ‘gambling with animals,’ and notes that though theft,
adultery, defamation and assault are all only forms of ‘crime’
(‘*Sāhasa*’) yet they have been mentioned separately, also, on the
analogy of such expressions as ‘*Gobalīvarda* .’

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 596), which explains ‘*padāni*’ as
‘*sthāna*’, ‘*viṣāya*’, ‘subjects;’—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 1);—in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 325);—in *Nṛṣiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 3b);—in
*Kṛtya* *kalpataru*’ (12b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 89b.)

On verses 1-7 *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 4a) has the following
notes:—‘*Vyavahārān*,’ business described above,—‘*pārthivaḥ*,’ the
anointed Kṣatriya;—the term ‘*nṛpaḥ*’ implies that what is here enjoined
applies also to those who, though not themselves kings, are appointed by
the king to work for him;—‘seated or standing’ may be options to be
determined by the king’s capacity, or by the respectability or otherwise
of the parties appearing before him the raising of the right arm is for
calling the attention of suitors; the dress etc. are to be humble, so
that the parties may not be confounded by his gorgeous
attire;—‘*pratyaham*’ shows that cases should be tried every day ;—‘
*deśadṛṣṭa*’ are those customs and arguments that may have local
application, such as the customs regarding the betrothal of girls
(described above) among ‘northerners.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.4-8)  
**

*Nārada* (1.16 *et. seq*.).—‘Recovery of Debt, Deposits, Partnership,
Resumption of Gift, Breach of Contract of Service;—Non-payment of wages,
Sales effected by a person other than the rightful owner, Non-delivery
of sold chattel, Recission of Purchase, Transgression of a Compact,
Boundary-disputes, Mutual Duties of Husband and Wife, Law of
Inheritances, Heinous offences, Abuse, Assault, Games, and
Miscellaneous;—these are the eighteen topics of legal procedure.’

*Bṛhaspati* (2.5 *et. seq*.).—‘Law-suits are of two kinds, according as
they originate in demands regarding wealth or ininjuries. Law-suits
regarding wealth are divided into fourteen kinds; and those regarding
injuries into four kinds. (1) Lending money on interest, (2) Deposits
(and Treasure Trove), (3) Invalid gifts, (4) Concerns of Partnership,
(5) Nonpayment of wages, (6) Disobedience, (7) Disputes concerning Land,
(8) Sale without ownership, (9) Revocation of sale and purchase, (10)
Breach of agreements, (11) Law between wife and husband, (12) Theft,
(13) Inheritance and (14) Gambling.—These are the fourteen titles
regarding wealth.—(l) and (2) Two kinds of Insults, (3) Violence and (4)
Criminal connexion with the wife of another man,—these are the four
titles originating in injury.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

विवादास्पदनिर्देशो ऽत्र चतुर्भिः श्लोकैः । **आद्यं** मुख्यम् । ऋणव्यवहारो ह्य् एष वनवासिनो ऽपि स्पृशति, अतो ऽस्य मुख्यतोच्यते ॥ ८.४–७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

007	(16) Duties of man and wife, (17) partition (of inheritance), (18) gambling and betting; these are in this world the eighteen topics which give rise to lawsuits.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/008_eShu_sthAneShu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>008 एषु स्थानेषु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एषु स्थानेषु भूयिष्ठं  
विवादं चरतां नृणाम् ।  
धर्मं शाश्वतम् आश्रित्य  
कुर्यात् कार्यविनिर्णयम्  ॥ ८.८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/008_eShu_sthAneShu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Taking his stand upon eternal morality, he shall form his decision on the suits of men who mostly carry on disputes in regard to the aforesaid points.—(8)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**भूयिष्ठ**ग्रहणं प्राधान्यख्यापनार्थम् । अन्ये ऽपि व्यवहारहेतवः सन्ति । यथा निवसनार्थं त्वया मे वेश्म दत्तम्, तत्र किम् इत्य् अर्वाग् वत्सराद् अन्यस्मै ददासीति । न चेदं दत्तानपकर्म, न ह्य् अत्र स्वत्वनिवृत्तिर् अस्ति, भोगानुज्ञामात्रं वसतः । तथा मदीयस्थण्डिलाभिमुखं त्वया वेश्मनि गवाक्षं कृतम् इति । **धर्मं शाश्वतम् आश्रित्ये**ति । अर्थकामाव् अशाश्वतौ । अथ वा शाश्वतो धर्म अनिदंप्रथमतो या व्यवस्था ताम् अनुपालयेत् । या त्व् इदानींतनैः प्रवर्तिता साशाश्वतत्वाद् अनादरणीया ॥ ८.८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The addition of the adverb ‘*mostly*’ is for the purpose of indicating
the importance of the said heads of dispute. As a matter of fact, there
are several other points of dispute also; *e.g*., (*a*) ‘you gave me
this house to live in; why then do you give it to another person before
the lapse of a year?’ This cannot he regarded as included under
‘non-delivery of what has been given away’; because in this case there
is no surrendering of ownership (which is a necessary condition in
*gifts*); the dweller is only permitted to dwell in the house;—again,
(*b*) ‘you have made a window in your house in front of my platform.’

‘*Taking his stand upon eternal Morality*’;—Wealth and Pleasure are not
‘eternal.’ Or, the term ‘eternal *morality*’ may mean that he should
follow that law or custom the beginnings of which cannot be traced;
while he should not pay heed to such customs as may have been adopted
only by the present generation; as such custom is *not eternal*.—(8)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 596);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(12b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.4-8)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verses
8.4-7].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एतानि व्यवहार[व]स्तूनि प्रधानभूतानि । तद्भेदानाम् आनन्त्याद् अशक्यो ह्य् अशेषतो निर्देशः कर्तुम् । **भूयिष्ठ**वचनाच् चैव तद्व्यवहारवस्तुबहुत्वं गम्यते । अनुक्तानाम् अपि शास्त्रानुसारिण्या प्रज्ञया **धर्मं शाश्वतम् आश्रित्य** कार्यनिर्णयं **कुर्यात्** । पितृपितामहादिप्रवर्तितम् अप्य् उत्सृज्यान्याय्यम् यत् कार[णात्] प्रायेण कृतानुसारी लोकः, विशेषेण तु राजान इति । अतो ऽयम् "आस्थीयते यत्न" इति, सामान्यश् चायम् उपदेशः । विशेषास् त्व् अस्य विषये वक्ष्यन्ते ॥ ८.८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

008	Depending on the eternal law, let him decide the suits of men who mostly contend on the titles just mentioned.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/009_yadA_svayam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>009 यदा स्वयम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यदा स्वयं न कुर्यात् तु  
नृपतिः कार्यदर्शनम् ।  
तदा नियुञ्ज्याद् विद्वांसं  
ब्राह्मणं कार्यदर्शने  ॥ ८.९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/009_yadA_svayam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When he himself may not carry on the investigation of suits, he shall appoint a learned Brāhmaṇa to do the work of investigation.—(9)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

- अष्टादशपदाभिज्ञं प्राड्विवाकेति संज्ञितम् ।

- आन्वीक्षिक्यां च कुशलं श्रुतिस्मृतिपरायणम् ॥ 

कुतश्चिद् अतिपातिकार्यान्तरव्यासङ्गाद् अपाटवाद् वा यदि स्वयं न पश्येत् तदा विद्वान् ब्राह्मणो नियोज्यः । विद्वत्ता च या व्यवहारविषया सा तदधिकारत एवार्थगृहीता । न हि यो यन् न जानाति स तत्राधिकारम् अर्हति । धर्मशास्त्रपरिज्ञानं तु रागद्वेषदोषेण विपरीतार्थावधारणनिवृत्त्यर्थम् उपयुज्यते । धर्मज्ञस् तु सतोर् अपि रागद्वेषयोः शास्त्रभयेन न[^८८] विपर्येत्य् इत्य् उपयोगवद् धर्मशास्त्रपरिज्ञानम् । व्यवहारदर्शनं तु तदर्थगृहीतम् । येन विना न शक्यते व्यवहारनिर्णयः कर्तुम्, तद्विज्ञानं तदधिकाराक्षिप्तम् । यत् तु ज्ञात्वान्यथा क्रियते तन्निवृत्तिर् उपदेशान्तरविषया । वक्ष्यति चैवमर्थं यत्नान्तरम् अपि- "वेदविदस् त्रयः राज्ञश् च प्रकृतो विद्वान्" (म्ध् ८.११) इति । शास्त्रान्तरपरिज्ञानं तु व्यवहारे ऽधिक्रियमाणस्यादृष्टाय स्यात् । "नियोज्यो विद्वान् स्यात्" इति पठितव्यम् । **नियुञ्ज्याद्** इति, नियुञ्जीत "स्वराद्यन्तोपसृष्टात्" (पत् इ- २९०, ओन् पाण् १.३.६४) इति हि कातीया आत्मनेपदं स्मरन्ति ॥ ८.९ ॥


[^८८]:
     M G omit: na
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa who is thus appointed should be ‘conversant with the
eighteen points, well versed in the Science of Reasoning, fully learned
in the Veda and the Smṛtis,—being called the Investigating Judge.’

If, either on account of being absorbed in some other more important
business, or on account of his inherent incapacity, the king does not
investigate the suits personally, then he should appoint a ‘*learned*’
*Brāhmaṇa*. The ‘learning’ here meant is that pertaining to legal
proceedings, and the man’s appointment itself is indicative of his
possession of that learning; because no man deserves to be appointed to
do a work which he does not know. A knowledge of the Science of Morality
also comes useful, for the purpose of precluding the possibility of
wrong decisions being taken under the influence of love or hate. If the
man is conversant with Morality, even though love or hate may be present
in his mind, yet, through fear of the said Science of Morality, he does
not allow himself to be misled_(;) and it is thus that a knowledge of
the Science of Morality comes in useful. As for the knowledge of legal
procedure, its presence is already implied; when the man is appointed to
do the work of deciding legal cases, it follows that he is possessed of
that knowledge without which such cases cannot he decided. The
injunction regarding the impropriety of the man knowingly perverting his
judgment is contained in other texts; and with a view to avoiding this
our author is going later on to lay down other Measures: *e.g*., ‘Three
persons learned in the Veda, and the learned man appointed by the king,
etc.’ (*verse* 11). As for the knowledge of Sciences other than these,
if it were made a necessary qualification for the man appointed to
investigate legal cases,—such knowledge could only be regarded as meant
for some unseen transcendental purpose.

‘*Niyojyo vidvān syāt*’ would be the right reading (in place of *tadā
niyuñjyād vidvāṃsam*’); because ‘*niyuñjyāt*’ is grammatically wrong,
the right form being ‘*niyuñjīta*’; as Kātyāyana’s Vārtika on Pāṇini
1.3.66 ordains the *Ātmanepada* ending for the root ‘*Yuj*’ preceded by
prepositions ending in a vowel.—(9)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 21), which adds
that the Brāhmaṇa so appointed is called the ‘*Prāḍvivāka*,’ ‘judge,’
who is to try the suits exactly in the same manner as has been laid down
for the king; It adds a text from Nārada explaining the name
‘*Prāḍvivāka*—‘The *Prāḍvivāka* is so called because *he puts questions*
(prāṭ) upon the subject-matter of the suit and *investigates* *it*
(Vivāka).—It is quoted also in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 36);—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (8a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 10b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (13.26).—‘The King or the Judge or a Brāhmaṇa learned in the
scriptures shall try the suit.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.2).—‘Let the King or his minister transact the business
on the bench.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.73).—‘Or let him entrust a Brāhmaṇa with the judicial
business.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.3).—‘The Brāhmaṇa knowing the entire Dharma shall be
appointed by the King to try law-suits, if, under pressure of business,
he is unable to look into them himself.’

*Bṛhaspati* (1.24).—‘Let the King, or a member of the twice-born caste
officiating as Chief Judge, try causes acting on principles of equity,
and abiding by the opinion of the judges and the doctrine of the sacred
law.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.23-34).—‘Where the King cannot personally attend to the
administration of justice, he should appoint a Brāhmaṇa who is versed in
the Vedas, self-controlled, highborn, impartial, unagitated and calm,
who fears the next life, is religious-minded, active and devoid of
anger. If the Brāhmaṇa is not learned enough, the King should appoint a
Kṣatriya, or a Vaiśya who is versed in the sacred law; but he should
never appoint the Śūdra, The king should always appoint men of the caste
to which he himself belongs; as most members of the royal caste are
likely to be well-qualified.’

*Nārada* (Parāśaramādhava-Vyavahāra, p. 22).—‘He is called the Chief
Judge who,—fully acquainted with the eighteen titles of law and with the
eight thousand subdivisions thereof, skilled in Logic and other
sciences, and thoroughly versed in revealed and traditional
lore,—investigates the law relative to the case in hand by *putting
questions* and *passing decisions* according to what was heard or
understood by him.’

*Kātyāyana* (Parāśaramādhava-Vyavahāra, p. 22).—‘When no Brāhmaṇa is
available, the King shall appoint a Kṣatriya or a Vaiśya versed in legal
lore; but he shall avoid the Śūdra.’

*Prajāpati* (Smṛticandrikā).—‘The anointed King or the learned Brāhmaṇa,
seated on the seat of judgment, shall investigate the suits quietly.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यदा कुतश्चिन् निमित्तान्तरतः स्वयं नृपतिः कार्यं न पश्येत्, तदा नियुञ्ज्याद् **ब्राह्मणं कार्यदर्शने**, नान्यवर्णं धर्मज्ञं व्यवहारज्ञम् अपि सन्तम्, ब्राह्मणम् अपि च विद्वांसं ब्राह्मणज्ञेयेष्व् एव शास्त्रेषु । तद्वर्तिधर्मानतिलङ्घनार्थोच्यते- व्यवहारदर्शनार्था तु विद्वत्तार्थगृहीतत्वाद् अशासनीया (?) ॥ ८.९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

009	But if the king does not personally investigate the suits, then let him appoint a learned Brahmana to try them.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/010_so.asya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>010 सो ऽस्य ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सो ऽस्य कार्याणि सम्पश्येत्  
सभ्यैर् एव त्रिभिर् वृतः ।  
सभाम् एव प्रविश्याऽग्र्याम्  
आसीनः स्थित एव वा  ॥ ८.१० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/010_so.asya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

That man, accompanied by three assessors, shall enter the excellent Court, and either seated or standing, shall investigate the suits on behalf of the king.—(10)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सभ्यैर्** इति जातिविशेषानुपादाने ऽप्य् उत्तरत्र विप्रग्रहणात् (म्ध् ८.११), "ब्राह्मणैः सह" (म्ध् ८.१) इति च पूर्वत्र ब्राह्मणग्रहणात्, ब्राह्मणा एव विज्ञायन्ते । त्रिग्रहणं त्व् एकद्वयोः प्रतिषेधार्थम् । त्रिप्रभृतयस् त्व् इष्यन्त एव । साक्षिप्रकरणे चैतद् वक्ष्यामः । **सभाम् एव प्रविश्याग्राम्** इति । राजस्थानापत्त्या सभां प्रविश्य स्थानासनेषु[^८९] तद्धर्मेषु पुनर्वचनं प्रदर्शनार्थं धर्मान्तरनिवृत्त्यर्थं वा । तेन राजस्थाने नोपविशति ॥ ८.१० ॥


[^८९]:
     DK (1: 32; 4:1817) suggests: sabhāpraveśasthānāsaneṣu
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Assesors*’;—though the caste of these persons is not specified here,
yet in view of the *Brāhmaṇa* being mentioned later on (in 11), and also
of the phrase ‘*along with Brāhmaṇas*’ (in *verse* 1 above), it follows
that these also should be *Brāhmaṇas*.

The number is mentioned as ‘*three*’ simply with a view to preclude the
possibility of only one or two men being appointed: what is meant is
that three or more men shall be appointed. This we shall explain in
detail under the section dealing with *Witnesses*.

‘*Shall enter the excellent Court*.’—Though entering the court as the
king’s representative, he shall stand or sit on such a seat as is proper
for himself. The repetition of ‘standing or sitting’ serves either to
indicate the right posture for him, or to preclude other postures. The
meaning of this is that he should not sit upon the king’s throne.—(10)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 21);—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 37);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (8a);—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 10b);—and in *Rājanītiratnākara* (p. 15b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Śukranīti* (4.5.77).—‘The Chief Judge is the speaker, the king is the
President, the councillors are the investigators.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.85-86).—‘The King should enter the court modestly,
together with the Brāhmaṇas and Ministers versed in state-craft, with
the object of investigating the cases.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

राजन्य् अस्वस्थशरीर कार्यान्तरव्याकुले वा **सभाम् एव प्रविश्याग्रां** न ततो ऽन्यत्र; न स[भायाम् अपि] राजासनम् अधिरुह्य, किं तर्हि सभायाम् एवान्यासनस्थः । **आसीनः स्थित एव वेति** स्थानासनयोर् विकल्पः । उक्तं प्रयोजनम् । सभायां साधवः **सभ्याः**, ते चोक्तविशेषणा एव सन्तो राजस्थानीयब्राह्मणसहाया एव भवेयुः ॥ ८.१० ॥

_अग्र्या सभ्येत्य् उक्तिम्, यतस् तदर्थम् इदम् उच्यते ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

010	That (man) shall enter that most excellent court, accompanied by three assessors, and fully consider (all) causes (brought) before the (king), either sitting down or standing.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/011_yasmin_deshe.md">
<details open><summary><h3>011 यस्मिन् देशे ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यस्मिन् देशे निषीदन्ति  
विप्रा वेदविदस् त्रयः ।  
राज्ञश् चाऽधिकृतो विद्वान्  
ब्रह्मणस् तां सभां विदुः  ॥ ८.११ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/011_yasmin_deshe.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

That place, where three Brāhmaṇas learned in the Veda sit, as also the learned Brāhmaṇa appointed by the king,—they regard as the ‘Court of Brahman.’—(11)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तं सभां प्रविश्य व्यवहारान् पश्येद् इति । सभाशब्दश् च लोके गृहप्रासादविशेषे वर्तते "मयेन निर्मिता दिव्या सभा हेमपरिष्कृता" इति । क्वचित् पुरुषविशेषसंघटिता सभेति तन्निवृत्त्यर्थं सभाया लक्षणम् आह । यत्र त्रयो ब्राह्मणा वेदविदः संनिधीयन्ते, राज्ञश् च संबन्धी प्रकृतो ऽधिकृतो विद्वान् इति । अथ वा प्रकृतो ऽनन्तरश्लोके संनिहितः । सेह सभाभिप्रेता । ब्रह्मग्रहणं स्तुत्यर्थम् । यथा ब्रह्मणः सभा निरवद्यैवम् इयम्[^९०] अपीति ॥ ८.११ ॥


[^९०]:
     M G: niravadyaiveyam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been declared that ‘having entered the Court, he shall look into
the cases.’ As regards the word ‘*sabhā*,’ in ordinary language it is
used in the sense of a particular apartment of the house; *e.g*., in the
Mahābhārata it is said that the ‘excellent gold-burnished *sabhā* was
built by Maya—sometimes it is also used in the sense of an assemblage of
particular men. In order to preclude these two meanings of the term, the
author states the definition of the ‘*Sabhā*,’ ‘Court,’ meant in the
present context.

That place where three Brāhmaṇas learned in the Veda are brought
together, as also the learned Brāhmaṇa appointed by the king,—or the
person mentioned in the preceding verse,—that is the ‘*Sabhā*’ meant
here.

The name of ‘*Brahman*’ has been mentioned for the purpose of extolling
the Court; the sense being that ‘the Court constituted as here stated is
as unexceptionable as that of Brahman himself.’—(11)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitāttva* (II, p. 199), to the effect that
the court becomes a true ‘Court,’ only by reason of the presence of the
duly qualified Brāhmaṇa-judge appointed by the king;—in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Vyavahāra, p. 46), which explains ‘*prakṛtaḥ*’ as the *appointed*
judge;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (8b);—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 36 and
11b), which says that no stress is meant to be laid upon the number
*three*, as the number may be larger, up to seven; what is meant is that
they shall not be less than three;—and in *Rājanītiratnākara* (p. 17a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bṛhaspati* (1.11).—‘That assembly is equal in sanctity to a sacrificial
session in which there sit seven, or five or three Brāhmaṇas, who are
acquainted with the world, with the Veda and with Law.’

*Bṛhaspati* (1.5).—‘A Court of Justice is composed of ten members; and
an assembly of this sort, in which the King examines the cases
attentively, is comparable to a religious session.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.50-52).—‘The assembly in which there are seven, five,
or even three Brāhmaṇas versed in human affairs, the Vedas and the
Dharmaśāstras is like a sacrificial session.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.72).—‘The ten requisites in the administration of
justice are—the king, officers, councillors, smṛti-books, accountant,
clerk, gold, fire, water and one’s own men.’

*Nārada* (3.18).—‘That is not a court where there are no elders; they
are not elders who do not pass a just, sentence; that is not just
sentence where there is no truth; that is not truth which is vitiated by
error.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**त्रि**ग्रहणान् नावेदविदस् ते स्युः; दण्डापूपिकया चत्वारो ऽपि न विरुद्ध्यन्ते । **राज्ञश् च** सहायं **प्रकृतो विद्वान्** इ[त्य् अनु]वाद उत्तरार्थः । **ब्रह्मणस् तां सभां विदुः** । <u>केचित्</u> तु ब्राह्मण इति पठन्ति । <u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । उक्तत्वाद् अस्य जातेः- "तदा नियुञ्ज्याद् विद्वांसं ब्राह्मणं कार्यकर्शने" इति पूर्वत्र । **ब्रह्मणो** ग्रहणं सभास्तुत्यर्थं युक्त[ं, ब्रह्म]सभेति । अथ वा "विनीतः प्रविशेत् सभाम्" इत्य् उक्तं यत्, तदुपलक्षणार्थम् इदम् उक्तम् । **यद्मिन् देश निषीदन्ति** इत्य् एवमादि लौकिकसभानिवृत्त्यर्थम् ॥ ८.११ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

011	Where three Brahmanas versed in the Vedas and the learned (judge) appointed by the king sit down, they call that the court of (four-faced) Brahman.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/012_dharmo_viddhas.md">
<details open><summary><h3>012 धर्मो विद्धस् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

धर्मो विद्धस् त्व् अधर्मेण  
सभां यत्रोपतिष्ठते ।  
शल्यं चाऽस्य न कृन्तन्ति  
विद्धास् तत्र सभासदः  ॥ ८.१२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/012_dharmo_viddhas.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In a court where Justice is pierced by Injustice, and the members of the Court do not remove that dart, these members also become pierced.—(12)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

\[The Bhāṣya has nothing to say on this verse.\]
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 5a and 10b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Śukranīti* (4.5.16).—‘The King who does not perform his civic duties
well certainly rots in hell.’

*Nārada* (3.89),—‘Where justice is slain by injustice and truth by
falsehood, the members of the court, who look on with indifference,
become doomed to destruction. When justice, hit by injustice, enters a
court, and the members do not extract the dart from the wound, they are
hit by it themselves.’

*Bṛhaspati* (1. 34-36).—‘Of the Tree of Justice, the Brāhmaṇa is the
root, the King is the stem and branches, the ministers are its loaves
and blossoms, just government is its fruit;—renown and wealth are the
sap of its fruit; a dignified station, invincibility, esteem among men,
and eternal residence in Heaven constitute the enjoyment of its
fruit.—Having recognised these advantages in justice, the King should be
equitable towards litigants, and should pass a just sentence, discarding
avarice and other evil propensities.’

*Kātyāyana* (Smṛticandrikā, p. 47).—‘Where a decision is taken by
councillors against the laws, there justice is slain by injustice. If
the king happens to be inclined to act unjustly, the councillors shall
not remain neutral; if they do remain neutral, they become degraded.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**धर्म** इति] तस्य वेधो ऽन्यथादर्शनम् । तत्फलं तु धर्मव्यवस्थाभङ्गहेतोर् अधिकृतब्राह्मणस्येदम् उच्यते । **शल्यं चास्य न कृन्तन्ति विद्धास् तत्र सभासदः**- शल्यम् इव शल्यप्रतिष्ठाहेतुत्वात् अस्य [यदि] न कृन्तन्त्य् एते पुन[ः] सभासदः विद्धाः सन्तः प्राग् एव । यतश् चैतद् एवम् अतो ऽसम्यक् प्रवर्तमानो राजा प्रकृतो वा ब्राह्मणस् सभ्यैर् नानुमन्तव्यः, व्यतिक्रमाद् धर्मवेधभयात् ॥ ८.१२ ॥

_अतः ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

012	But where justice, wounded by injustice, approaches and the judges do not extract the dart, there (they also) are wounded (by that dart of injustice).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/013_sabhAM_vA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>013 सभां वा ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सभां वा न प्रवेष्टव्यं  
वक्तव्यं वा समञ्जसम् [मेधातिथिपाठः - सभा वा न प्रवेष्टव्या] ।  
अब्रुवन् विब्रुवन् वापि  
नरो भवति किल्बिषी  ॥ ८.१३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/013_sabhAM_vA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One should either not enter the Court at all, or he should speak out what is equitable; one who either spe aks nothing, or speaks falsely, becomes tainted with sin.—(13)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अनेनार्थेन द्वयं विप्रतिषिध्यते । प्रतिपन्नाधिकारेण मिथ्यादर्शनं न कर्तव्यम् अन्येन च क्रियमाणं नोपेक्षणीयम् । तत्रोभयथा दोषः । **अब्रुवन्न्** अन्येन विपरीते ऽनुष्ठीयमाने तूष्णीम् आसीनो हस्तक्षेपेण वा शास्त्रन्यायविरुद्धं[^९१] ब्रुवन् **किल्बिषी** पापभाग् भवति । तेन नैषा प्रत्याशा कर्तव्या । द्वितीयः प्राड्विवाको मिथ्या पश्यति, स एव योज्यते[^९२], अहं तूष्णींभूत उदासीनः किम् इत्य् एनसा योक्ष्य इति । सभाप्रवेशनिषेधेन चात्र व्यवहारदर्शनाधिकारप्रतिपत्तिः प्रतिषिध्यते । **सभा वा न प्रवेष्टव्येति** । व्यवहारदर्शनाधिकारो न प्रतिपादनीय इत्य् अर्थः । प्रतिपन्नश् चेत् समञ्जसं वक्तव्यम् । अनेन त्व् अनधिकृतस्यापि यदृच्छया संनिहितस्य मिथ्यापश्यत्सु सभ्येषु विदुषस् तूणींभावं नेच्छन्ति । तथा च "नियुक्तो वानियुक्तो वा धर्मज्ञो वक्तुम् अर्हति" । अथ राजपुरुषपर्यनुयोग आशङ्क्यते किम् इत्य् अनधिकृतो ब्रवीति, ततश् च तत्प्रदेशाद् अपसर्तव्यम् । तद् इदम् उक्तम्- "दुर्बलहिंसायां चाविमोचने[^९३] शक्तश् चेत्" इति (ग्ध् २१.१९) ॥ ८.१३ ॥


[^९३]:
M G J: ca vimocane


[^९२]:
M G DK: yojayati


[^९१]:
M G: śāstrānyāviruddhaṃ; DK (1: 34): śāstrājñāviruddhaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What is asserted here forbids two things—(*a*) he who has accepted the
appointment (of a Judge) should not be unjust, and (*b*) he should not
slur over the injustice committed by others; since both these involve
sin.

‘*Speaks nothing*’;—*i.e*., he who remains silent when another person is
committing an injustice,—or he who interferes in the investigation and
then says what is not compatible with the scriptures or with
justice—‘*becomes tainted with sin*’—*i.e*., comes to partake of the
sin. Hence the man should not entertain the hope that—‘it is another
judge who is judging wrongly, and he may incur sin, I am only sitting
silent and indifferent, why should I he affected by the sin?’

By the prohibiting of entrance into the Court what is forbidden is the
accepting of the appointment of a judge to investigate cases; so that
what is meant by the sentence ‘*one should not enter the Court*’ is that
‘he should not accept the appointment of the investigating judge, or, if
he does accept it, he should speak out what is just.’

This has been taken to imply that when even an unauthorised person
happens.to be present, if he finds that the judges are acting wrongly,
he should not remain silent. To this end wo have the
assertion—‘Authorised or unauthorised, the man who knows what is just
should always speak out’ (*Nārada* 2.2). If he fear molestation at the
hands of the king’s officers as to why he should speak, when he is not
authorised to do so,—then he should go away from that place. In support
of this we have the following assertion—‘When a wrong is being inflicted
upon a weak person, if one does not save him from it, he incurs sin,
*only if he hag the power to gave him*’ (Gautama, 21.19).—(13)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 604);—in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.2), in
support, of the view that the assessors duly appointed incur sin if they
do not, check the king in the event of his taking an illegal course; but
as regards other people present, these incur sin only if they either
speak falsely or suppress the truth,—and not for not checking the
king;—and again on 2.83;—and also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p.
12a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Śukranīti* (4.5.53, 55).—‘The man who knows Dharma can speak, whether
appointed or not appointed. Either one should not come to the Court, or
should speak truthfully. That man is a sinner who keeps silent or utters
falsehood.’

*Nārada* (3.10).—‘Either the judicial assembly must not be entered at
all, or a fair opinion should be delivered. That man who stands mute or
delivers an opinion contrary to justice, is a sinner.’

*Nārada* (3.14).—‘He who, having entered the Court, delivers a strange
opinion, ignoring the true state of the case, resembles a blind man who,
regardless, swallows fish together with the bones.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **सभा व न प्रवेष्टव्या वक्तव्यं वा समञ्जसम् ।**

व्यवहारप्रदर्शनाधिकारो वा न प्रतिपत्तव्यो राजतः सभ्यैः, वक्तव्यं वा प्रतिपन्नाधिकारैस् तत्र समञ्जसं सत्यम् । येन —

> **अब्रुवन् विब्रुवन् वापि नरो भवति किल्बिषी  ॥ ८.१३ ॥**

न केवलं विब्रुवन् किल्बिषी भवति, किं तर्हि अब्रुवन्न् अपि । अतो न "सभ्यैर् अयम् उपेक्षणीयो ऽन्यथा पश्यन् राजप्रकृतो ऽयं करोत्य् एवम्, तद् एवं न वयम्" इति नात्रौदासीन्याद् यूयम् उच्यध्वम् ॥ ८.१३ ॥

_तथा चाहुः ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

013	Either the court must not be entered, or the truth must be spoken; a man who either says nothing or speaks falsely, becomes sinful.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/014_yatra_dharmo.md">
<details open><summary><h3>014 यत्र धर्मो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यत्र धर्मो ह्य् अधर्मेण  
सत्यं यत्राऽनृतेन च ।  
हन्यते प्रेक्षमाणानां  
हतास् तत्र सभासदः  ॥ ८.१४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/014_yatra_dharmo.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Where justice is destroyed by injustice, or truth by falsehood, while people are looking on,—there the members of the court also are destroyed.—(14)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**धर्मः**[^९४] शास्त्रन्यायदेशनियता व्यवस्था । सा चेद् **अधर्मेण**[^९५] तद्व्यतिक्रमरूपेण **हन्यते** विनाश्यते ऽर्थिना प्रत्यर्थिना । तथा **सत्यम् अनृतेन** साक्षिभिर् हन्यते । प्राड्विवाकादयश् च **प्रेक्षन्ते** न तत्त्वम् उद्धरन्ति, ततस् ते **हताः** शवतुल्या भवन्तीति निन्द्यते । तस्मान् नार्थिप्रत्यर्थिनौ विपरीतम् आचरन्तौ सभासद्भिर् उपेक्ष्यौ, साक्षिणश् च । धर्माधर्मग्रहणेन सत्यानृतग्रहणेन वा सिद्धौ,[^९६] श्लोकपूरणम् उभयोर् उपादानम् । अतो विषयभेदेन व्याख्यातम् ॥ ८.१४ ॥


[^९६]:
     M G J: siddhaṃ; I follow DK (1:35)


[^९५]:
     M G: vedadharmeṇa


[^९४]:
     M G: dharma-
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Justice*’ is decision arrived at in strict accordance with the
scriptures, reasoning and local customs;—if this is

‘*destroyed by Injustice*,’—*i.e*., set aside by the reverse of
justice,—by either the plaintiff or the defendant;—similarly where
‘*truth is destroyed by falsehood*’—by the witnesses;—and all the time
the judges and the other people in the Court remain looking on, and do
not try to draw out the real facts,—then these men also are
‘*destroyed*,’—*i.e*., become as good as dead corpses. This is meant to
be a deprecation of the judges, etc.

For these reasons the members of the Court shall not connive at any
misrepresentations being made by the parties or by the witnesses.

In as much as the mention of ‘Justice and Injustice’ only, or of ‘Truth
and Falsehood’ only, would have been sufficient, the mention of both
would have to be regarded as serving the purpose of tilling up the
metre; hence it has been explained as referring to two distinct sets of
persons (the parties and the witnesses).—(14)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (3.89).—‘Where justice hit by injustice enters a Court, and the
members do not extract the dart from the wounds, they are hit by it
themselves. Where justice is slain by injustice, and truth by falsehood,
the members of the Court who look on with indifference, become doomed to
destruction.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 604).—(Same as Nārada.)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **यत्र धर्मो ह्य् अधर्मेण**

व्यवस्था चाव्यवस्थया पूर्वापरादिविप्रतिषेधानुमोदनादिलक्षणया,

> **सत्यं यत्रानृतेन च ।**

कूटसाक्षिभिः,

> **हन्यते प्रेक्षमाणानां हतास् तत्र सभासदः  ॥ ८.१४ ॥**

तस्मात् सभ्यैर् नोदासीनैर् भवितव्यम् । न साक्षिणः कुर्वन्तीति सभ्या मुच्यन्ते ॥ ८.१४ ॥

_एवं च सति ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

014	Where justice is destroyed by injustice, or truth by falsehood, while the judges look on, there they shall also be destroyed.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/015_dharma_eva.md">
<details open><summary><h3>015 धर्म एव ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

धर्म एव हतो हन्ति  
धर्मो रक्षति रक्षितः ।  
तस्माद् धर्मो न हन्तव्यो  
मा नो धर्मो हतो ऽवधीत् [मेधातिथिपाठः - वधीत्]  ॥ ८.१५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/015_dharma_eva.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Justice, blighted, blights; and justice, preserved, preserves; hence justice should not be blighted, lest blighted justice blight us.—(15)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

न भयाद् अन्यथादर्शनं कर्तव्यम्, यतो **धर्मो** व्यतिक्रान्तः सन् **हन्ति**, नो ऽर्थी[^९७] तत्सहायो राजा वा । तथा **धर्म एव** पालितः सर्वतो भयम् अपनुदति । नापकर्तुम् अर्थ्यादयः[^९८] क्रुद्धाः शक्नुवन्ति । **तस्माद्** एवंजानता,[^९९] "सुखदुःखे धर्माधीने" इति, **धर्मो न हन्तव्यः** इति । यदि वयं धर्मं हन्मस् तदा सो ऽस्मान् सर्प इव रोषितः प्रतिहन्तीत्य् अतो **धर्मो हतः** सन् **मा** अस्मान् **वधीद्** इत्य् आत्मपरित्राणार्थं धर्मो रक्षितव्यः ॥ ८.१५ ॥


[^९९]:
     M G: evaṃjānaḥ; J: evaṃjānānaḥ; I follow DK (1: 35; 5: 627).


[^९८]:
     M G: arthādayaḥ


[^९७]:
     M G: no 'rthaṃ; J: hanti ity arthaḥ — pratyarthī; DK (5: 627) ity arthaḥ, no 'rthī ( the text here is clearly corrup).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Judgment should not be perverted, through fear; because justice, when
violated, ‘*blights*’— our prosperity, as also the prosperity of the
sinful party and his helpers.

Similarly, when ‘preserved,’ justice removes dangers from all sources;
so that even though angered, the party (defeated) cannot do any harm.

‘*Hence*’—*i*.*e*., knowing this, that happiness and unhappiness are
based upon morality, one should not violate morality (or justice). If we
violate justice, justice shall, like an enraged serpent, strike back at
us; so *lest justice blight us*—*i*.*e*., with a view to saving
ourselves,—we should preserve justice.—(15)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 17a);—in
*Hemādri* (Vrata, p. 15);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 48);—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (11b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata* (3.313.38).

*Mahābhārata* (Vana, 314.131).—‘If protected, justice protects; if
slain, it slays; therefore I shall never renounce justice; lest justice,
being slain, may slay ourselves.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवम् अभिप्रायेण राजप्रकृतो ऽवबोध्यते- "धर्मप्रसादाद् इदम् आधिपत्यं ते प्राप्तम्", येन न राजप्रसादात् । अतो न धर्मं हन्तुम् अर्हति । एकेवचनाच् च लिङ्गाद् औपरिष्ठके श्लोके, "तस्माद् धर्मं न लोपेयेत्" इत्य् अस्माद् राजप्रकृतो, न सभासदो बहुत्वात् ॥ ८.१५ ॥

_यतश् च निर्वचनम् इदम् ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

015	'Justice, being violated, destroys; justice, being preserved, preserves: therefore justice must not be violated, lest violated justice destroy us.'
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/016_vRSho_hi.md">
<details open><summary><h3>016 वृषो हि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वृषो हि भगवान् धर्मस्  
तस्य यः कुरुते ह्य् अलम् [मेधातिथिपाठः - त्व् अलम्] ।  
वृषलं तं विदुर् देवास्  
तस्माद् धर्मं न लोपयेत्  ॥ ८.१६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/016_vRSho_hi.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For Justice is the revered ‘Vṛṣa,’ Bull; and he who commits the violation, ‘alam,’ of it, him the gods regard as ‘vṛṣala,’ low-born; hence one shall not violate Justice.—(16)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**वृषल**शब्दनिर्वचनेन मिथ्यादर्शी निन्द्यते । न जातिवृषलो वृषलः, किं तर्हि, यो वृषस्य कामवर्षिणो धर्मस्य अलंकुरुते । निवृत्तिवचनः अलंशब्दः । स **वृषल** इत्य् एतम् अर्थम् **देवाः** प्रतिपन्नाः । मनुष्यास् तु यदि जातिशब्दम् एव मन्यन्ते, कामं मन्यन्ताम्, प्रमाणतरास् तु देवाः । ते चानेन प्रवृत्तिनिमित्तेन वृषलशब्दप्रोयोगं मन्यन्ते । देवग्रहणम् अर्थवादः । तस्मात् "श्राद्धकाले वृषलैर् न प्राप्तव्यम्", "हन्तव्यो वृषलश् चौरः," इत्याद्यासु क्रियासु मिथ्यादर्शी ब्राह्मण एव वृषलशब्देन ग्रहीतव्य इति । अतो वृषलत्वं मा प्रापम् इति **धर्मं न लोपयेत्,** न नाशयेद् इति । वृषलत्वाध्यारोपो निन्दा ॥ ८.१६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

By means of the explanation of the term ‘*vṛṣala*,’ the judge who
perverts justice is censured. The title of ‘*vṛṣala*’ (low-born) does
not apply to one who is so by caste—*i.e*., the *śūdra*,—but he who
‘*commits the violation*’ (‘*alam*’) of the *Bull*, ‘*vṛṣa*,’—*i.e*., he
who showers all blessings;—the particle ‘*alam*’ denoting *violation,
perversion*.

The opinion that such a person is ‘*vṛṣala*’ is held by the gods; if it
is taken as denoting a *caste*, it may be so taken; but the gods are
more authoritative, and they accept the denotation of the term as here
explained.

The mention of the ‘*gods*’ is only a commendatory exaggeration.

For the reason here explained, in all such texts as—(*a*) ‘no *vṛṣala*
should come in during the performance of a *śrāddha*,’ or ‘the *vṛṣala*
thief should be killed,’—the term ‘*vṛṣala*’ should be taken as standing
for the Brāhmaṇa that perverts truth.

Consequently one should not violate Justice, lest he become tainted with
the character of the ‘*vṛṣala*’; the application of this character to
the Brāhmaṇa being a form of deprecation.—(16)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 447), in support of the
interpretation of ‘*vṛṣala*’ as ‘one devoid of *dharma*’;—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (11a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.16-17)**

*Mahābhārata* (Śānti, 90.16).—‘Justice is the sacred Bull, *Vṛṣa*; he
who brings about his destruction, *laya*, is called the *Vṛṣala*;
therefore one should never renounce justice.’

Do. (Anuśāsana, 173.14.16).—‘When one abandons his body, Dharma alone
goes with him. Dharma is the only helper for men in the other world.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

न जातिवृषल एव वृषलः, किं तर्हि विकर्मणात्र वृषलो भवति । तथा च सति किं ब्राह्मणजातिस् ते करिष्यति व्यतिक्रमाद् अधर्मेण ग्रस्यमानस्य । यत्कारणाद् राजनियुक्तब्राह्मणोपालम्भ एवायम् ॥ ८.१६ ॥

_इदम् अपरं प्रसंख्यानम् अधिकृतब्राह्मणव्यवस्थार्थम् उच्यते ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

016	For divine justice (is said to be) a bull (vrisha); that (man) who violates it (kurute 'lam) the gods consider to be (a man despicable like) a Sudra (vrishala); let him, therefore, beware of violating justice.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/017_eka_eva.md">
<details open><summary><h3>017 एक एव ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एक एव सुहृद् धर्मो  
निधाने ऽप्य् अनुयाति यः ।  
शरीरेण समं नाशं  
सर्वम् अन्यद् +धि गच्छति  ॥ ८.१७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/017_eka_eva.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Morality (Justice) is the only friend who follows one even after death; everything else perishes along with the body.—(17)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

भयाद् धर्मातिक्रमो न कर्तव्य इत्य् एतत् "धर्म एव हतो हन्ति" इत्य् अनेनोपदिष्टम्, स्नेहतो न कर्तव्य इत्य् अनेनोपदिश्यते । यत **एकः सुहृद् धर्मः,** तत्र स्नेहो भावनीयः । अन्यो ऽपि मनुष्यः सुहृत्[^१००] कार्यम् अपेक्ष्य जहाति जीवनम् । यो ऽपि स्याद् अत्यन्तमित्रं तस्यापि सौहार्दम् आ निधनात् । धर्मस् तु मृतम् अपि पुरुषम् अन्वेति । अतो न सुहृदपेक्षया मिथ्यादर्शनम् उपेक्षा वा[^१०१] कर्तव्या ।


[^१०१]:
     M G omit: vā


[^१००]:
     M G add: dharmaḥ nidhane 'py anjuyān

- भार्या पुत्रो मित्रम् अर्थाश् च रिक्थम् 

- नश्यन्त्य् एते देहनाशे नरस्य ।

- धर्मस् त्व् एको नैनम् उज्झत्य् अजस्रं

- तस्माज् जह्यात् पुत्रदारान् न धर्मम् ॥

यद् **अन्यद्** धर्माद् भार्यादि, तत् **सर्वं** **शरीरेण समं** सह **नाशं गच्छति** । धर्माद् अन्यो मृतं न परित्रातुं कश्चित् समर्थ इत्य् अतः सुहृद्बान्धवानुरोधाद् अपि धर्मो न हातव्यः ॥ ८.१७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What has been declared in verse 15 is that Morality or Justice should
not be perverted, through *fear*; and the present verse declares that it
should not be perverted through *love* either.

In as much as Morality (Justice) is the ‘only friend,’ it is for this
that one should cultivate it. Ordinary men often abandon their friends
even during life; even in the case of those that are very great friends,
the friendship lasts only till death. Morality on the other hand,
follows the man even when dead. Therefore even for the sake of
friendship, one should not either pervert justice or connive at its
perversion.

In this sense there is the following saying—‘Wife, son, friends, riches
and wealth—all these are lost when the man’s body is destroyed; it is
Morality alone which never abandons him; hence one might abandon his
sons and wife, but never Morality.’

Everything else, in the shape of wife, son and so forth,—except
Morality—perishes with the body; *i.e*., except Morality nothing is able
to save the man on death; so that even for the sake of friends and
relations, Morality should not be abandoned.—(17)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Hitopadeśa* 1,59;—in *Hemādri* (Vrata, p.
14);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 17a);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(11a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.16-17)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.16].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यतः सुहृन्मित्राद्य् अपेक्षयापि न धर्मो मोक्तव्यः । अन्यथा हि तदुपेक्षया न केवलम् अपराधिनः प्रत्यवायो ऽन्यथादर्शने, किं तर्हि —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

017	The only friend who follows men even after death is justice; for everything else is lost at the same time when the body (perishes).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/018_pAdo.adharmasya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>018 पादो ऽधर्मस्य ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पादो ऽधर्मस्य कर्तारं  
पादः साक्षिणम् ऋच्छति ।  
पादः सभासदः सर्वान्  
पादो राजानम् ऋच्छति  ॥ ८.१८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/018_pAdo.adharmasya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One quarter of the Injustice falls on the man who commits it, one quarter on the witness, one quarter on the members of the Court and one quarter on the king.—(18)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

न चैषा मनिषा कर्तव्या- "अर्थिना प्रत्यर्थिना वान्यतरस्य भूम्याद्य् अपह्रियते स एव भूम्यपहारदोषभाग् भविष्यति । वयं तु तदकारिणः किम् इति दोषवन्तः स्याम" यतस् तत् पापं चतुर्धा विभज्यते । अर्थवादश् चायम् । न ह्य् अन्यकृतस्यैनसो ऽन्यत्र गमनम् अस्ति । तेषाम् अपि मिथ्यादर्शननिषेधातिक्रमाद् उत्पद्यते पापं मिथ्यालम्बनम्, राज्ञः स्वयम् अपश्यतो ऽप्य् अधिकृतराजस्थानीयादिदोषाद् दोषवत्त्वम् । यदि वा[^१०२] राजाधिकृतो मिथ्याचरितेन ज्ञापितः, पराजितं दुष्टं न निगृह्णीते न च पुनः सम्यक् निर्णयं करोति, ततः सो ऽपि पापभाग् भवति । अधिकृतोपलक्षणार्थं वा राजग्रहणम् । यदा राजा स्वयं मिथ्या पश्यति तदा दुष्यति । यदा राजस्थानीयस् तदा तस्य दोष इत्य् अर्थः ॥ ८.१८ ॥


[^१०२]:
     M G DK (1:36) omit: vā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The judges should not entertain any such idea as the following—‘Between
the plaintiff and the defendant, one or the other is taking what belongs
to the other,—so that he will incur the sin of wrongful possession of
the land,—we are not committing the act,—why then should we be
participators in the sin?’ Because as a matter of fact, the said sin is
divided into four parts.

This verse is a purely supplementary exaggeration; because in reality
the sin committed by one man does not go to another. What happens then
is that on the judges also falls the sin of transgressing the law that
forbids unjust decisions. On the king, though he does not personally
investigate the case, there does fall the sin resulting from the sinful
act of the judges appointed by him and acting as his representatives. Or
if, on being apprised, by the defeated party, of the unfair dealings of
the authorised judges, he does not punish the dishonest officer, and
does not take steps to come to a just decision, then also he becomes a
participator in the sin. Or, the ‘*King*’ in the text may be taken as
standing for the judge appointed by him; the sense being that when the
king himself decides the case wrongly, the sin falls upon him, whereas
when his representative does so, the sin falls upon the latter.—(18)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Sabhāsadaḥ*’—‘People assembled in Court’ (Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda)‘Judges’ (Govindarāja).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.305), to the effect that in
the case of miscarriage of justice, every one of those persons should be
punished;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 15);—in *Smṛtitattva* (II,
p. 200);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 5a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana* (1.19.8).—‘Of injustice in decisions, one quarter falls on
the party in the cause, one quarter on his witnesses, one quarter on all
the judges, and one quarter on the King.’

*Gautama* (13.11).—‘If the sacred law or the rules are violated, the
guilt falls on the witnesses, the Assessors, the King, and the
offender.’

*Nārada* (3.12).—‘One quarter of the iniquity goes to the offender, one
quarter goes to the witness; one quarter goes to all the members of the
Court; one quarter goes to the King.’

*Hārīta* (Vyavahāratattva).—‘Of injustice, one quarter falls on the
perpetrator, one quarter on the witness, one quarter on all the members
of the Court and one quarter on the King.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यतो नैवम् उपेक्षा कर्तव्या, "कर्ता साक्षिणो वा दोषेण संबध्यन्ते, किम् अस्माकम् उदासीनानां भविष्यति" इति । असम्यग्व्यवहारदर्शने हि सर्वत्रैनो विभज्यते । यद्य् अपि चैनसो ऽन्येन कृतस्य विभागो नास्ति, दोषसंबन्धार्थवादस् त्व् अनेन न्यायेन प्रदर्श्यते असम्यग्दर्शननिवृत्त्यर्थम् ॥ ८.१८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

018	One quarter of (the guilt of) an unjust (decision) falls on him who committed (the crime), one quarter on the (false) witness, one quarter on all the judges, one quarter on the king.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/019_rAjA_bhavaty.md">
<details open><summary><h3>019 राजा भवत्य् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

राजा भवत्य् अनेनास् तु  
मुच्यन्ते च सभासदः ।  
एनो गच्छति कर्तारं  
निन्दार्हो यत्र निन्द्यते  ॥ ८.१९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/019_rAjA_bhavaty.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Where, however, the person deserving of censure is actually censured, there the king becomes sinless, the members of the court become freed, and the sin falls upon the perpetrator.—(19)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

एष एवार्थो विपर्ययेणोच्यते । यत्र दोषवान् दोषं गोपयितुं न लभते प्रकटीक्रियते तदीयो दोषः, तत्र सर्वं साधु संपद्यत इति । "यत्र धर्मः" (म्ध् ८.१४) इत्य् अत आरभ्य मिथ्यादर्शनोपेक्षणप्रतिषेधार्थं निन्दाप्रशंसाभ्यां शुभाशुभफलदर्शनार्था अर्थवादाः ॥ ८.१९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The same idea is stated conversely.

Where the guilty person is not able to hide his guilt, and his guilt is
duly exposed, then everything turns out to be right.

From verse 14 onwards we have a set of supplementary exaggerations,
containing praises and condemnations indicating the good and bad
results,—put forward for the purpose of forbidding the actual committing
of injustice, as also the conniving at it (being committed by others).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 604);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 26), to the effect that the king becomes absolved from
all sin if he shows complete impartiality;—in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 200)
which adds the following notes:—‘*Kartāram*’ means the ‘speaker’, the
perjuror,—the term ‘*rājā*’ here stands for the Judge, —‘*anenāḥ*’ means
‘free from sin’;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 48);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 5a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (3.13).—‘The King is freed from responsibility, the members of
the Court obtain their absolution, and the guilt rests on the
offender,—when the guilty person is punished.’

*Bodhāyana* (1.19.8).—‘When he who deserves condemnation is condemned,
the King is guiltless and the judges free from blame; the guilt falls on
the offender alone.’

*Hārita*( Vyavahāratattva).—(Same as Manu.)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवं सम्यग्व्यवहारदर्शने,सर्वम् इदं साधु संपद्यत इति अर्थप्राप्तो ऽप्य् अयम् अर्थो वाक्यस्वाभाव्याद् अनूद्यते ॥ ८.१९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

019	But where he who is worthy of condemnation is condemned, the king is free from guilt, and the judges are saved (from sin); the guilt falls on the perpetrator (of the crime alone).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/020_jAtimAtropajIvI_vA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>020 जातिमात्रोपजीवी वा ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

जातिमात्रोपजीवी वा  
कामं स्याद् ब्राह्मणब्रुवः ।  
धर्मप्रवक्ता नृपतेर्  
न तु शूद्रः कथं चन  ॥ ८.२० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/020_jAtimAtropajIvI_vA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Even a so-called Brāhmaṇa, who makes a living by his caste only, may, at pleasure be the propounder of the Law for the king,—but not a Śūdra under any circumtsances.—(20)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तं ब्राह्मणैः सह धर्मनिर्णयं कुर्यात्, मन्त्रिभिश् च मन्त्रज्ञैः । तत्र मन्त्रिणां जातेर् अविशेषितत्वाच् छूद्रा अपि सभां प्रविष्टा मन्त्रित्वाद् अनुज्ञातव्यवहारनिर्णयास् तद्रता धर्मव्यवस्थां कथंचित् संस्कृतबुद्धयो ब्रूयुः । न च सर्वत्र व्यवहारे स्मृतिशास्त्रपरिज्ञानम् उपयुज्यते, येन तदभावाद् अर्थलुप्तत्वाद् अनर्थकः शूद्रप्रतिषेध आशङ्क्येत । तथा हि जयपराजयकारणानि लौकिकप्रमाणवेद्यान्य् एव साक्ष्यादीनि, अयं साक्षी धार्मिको न चैतस्य केनचित् संबन्धेन संबन्धी । अयं त्व् असाक्ष्य् असकृद् दृष्टव्यभिचारत्वाद् इत्य् एवमादि शक्यते व्युत्पन्नबुद्धिना स्वयम् उत्प्रेक्षितुं न स्मृतिशास्त्रैकगोचरः[^१०३] । अतः प्राप्तस्य प्रतिषेधो ऽयं । न च मन्त्रित्वे पुरोहितवज् जातिनियमः । तथा हि "तैः सार्धं चिन्तयेत्" (म्ध् ७.५६) इत्य् उक्त्वा ततो ब्राह्मणेन सह चिन्तयेद् इति (म्ध् ७.५८) । तेनायम् अर्थो यद्य् अपि कथंचिच् छूद्रो न्यायलेशात् समधिगच्छेत् तथापि राजाधिकरणे विवदतो मन्त्री निग्रहाधिकृतो वा न किंचित् प्रब्रूयात् । पूर्वश्लोकार्धः प्रतिषेधशेषतया[^१०४] व्याख्येयः । न हि जातिमात्रोपजीविनो वैदुष्यादिगुणरहितस्य धर्मप्रवक्तृत्वनियोगः शक्यो वक्तुं तस्यैव रूपपरीक्षायां "तस्माद् विषं भक्षय मा चास्य गृहे भुङ्क्था" इतिवत् प्रतिषेधशेषभूतम् इदम् अनुज्ञानं न पुनर् अनुज्ञानम् एव । अत एव **कामम्** इत्य् आह । कामशब्दप्रयोगे हि विधित्वं व्याहन्यते । 


[^१०४]:
     M G: pūrvaślokārthapratiṣedhaḥ śeṣatayā; J: pūrvaślokārthapratiṣedhaśeṣatayā; I follow DK (1: 33).


[^१०३]:
     J: -gocaram

<u>अन्ये तु</u> ब्रुवते । ब्राह्मणस्य प्रवक्तृत्वविधानात् तदा नियोज्यो विद्वान् स्याद् ब्राह्मण इति क्षत्रियादयस् त्रयो ऽपि वर्णा निषिद्धास् तत्रेह पुनः शूद्रप्रतिषेधो विद्वद्ब्राह्मणाभावे क्षत्रियवैशयोर् अभ्यनुज्ञानार्थ इति । शेषं समानम् ।   
**जातिमात्रम् उपजीवतीति** मात्रशब्दो ऽवधारणे । ब्राह्मणजातिम् एव केवलाम् उपाश्रित्य जीवति नाध्ययनादीन् गुणविशेषान् निर्गुणत्वात् । **ब्रुव**शब्दः कुत्सायाम् ॥ ८.२० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been said above (under verse 10) that the king shall decide cases
helped by Brāhmaṇas and by three men well versed in council. Now, in as
much as the caste of these councillors has not been specified, it might
so happen that Śūdras might enter the Court, and being ‘councillors,’ it
would be permissible for them to decide cases, and being possessed of
cultured minds, they might pronounce their opinions on matters relating
to the Law; specially in all legal proceedings a knowledge of
Smṛti-texts is not essential, on account of not possessing which the
*Śūdra* could be precluded from pronouncing judgments. As a matter of
fact, grounds of victory and defeat (in legal proceedings),—such as
witnesses and other kinds of evidence—are such as are amenable to the
ordinary means of knowledge. For instance, a man possessed of cultivated
intelligence can easily find out that ‘such and such a person is a right
witness, and not related, by any relationship, to the party citing him,’
or that ‘such another person is not a right witness, having several
times been found to have lied’; and such matters are not cognisable
means of *Smṛti-texts* only.

Thus then the present verse contains the prohibition of a possible
contingency.

Nor is there any definite rule regarding the caste of the ‘Councillor,’
as there is in regard to that of the ‘Priest’; *e.g*., having declared
that ‘he shall with them (the Councillors) consider the questions, etc.,
etc.’ (7.56), the text does not say that ‘he shall consider these, with
the Brāhmaṇas.’ Thus the the meaning of the verse comes to be this—‘even
though a *Śūdra* might learn up hits of Law, and be a Councillor or an
officer for inflicting punishments, yet he shall not pronounce any
opinion on the merits of cases being investigated in the King’s Court.’

What is said in the first half of the verse is to be explained as
supplementary to the above prohibition. Because it cannot be asserted,
in any case, that the Brāhmaṇa, who makes a living by his caste and is
entirely devoid of learning and other qualifications, should be a
propounder of the Law. Hence, when we come to examine its exact
significance and form, the affirmation (contained in the first half of
the verse) is found to stand on the same footing as the assertion ‘eat
poison, but do not eat in his house,’ where also the affirmation (‘eat
poison’) is supplementary to the prohibition, and not a real affirmation
at all.

It is for this reason that the author has added the term ‘*kāmam*,’
‘*may, at pleasure*;’ the very use of this term deprives the sentence of
its injunctive character.

Other people offer the following explanation:—“Inasmuch as the Brāhmaṇa
has been specifically declared to be employed as the Propounder of the
Law, in such texts as—‘the learned Brāhmaṇa shall be appointed,
etc.,’—this in itself excludes all the other three castes, the Kṣatriya
and the rest; so that what the prohibition of the *Śūdra* in the present
verse means is that in the absence of *Brāhmaṇas*, the *Kṣatriya* and
the *Vaiśya* may he appointed (hut never the *Śūdra*).” The rest of it
they explain, as above.

‘*Who makes a living by his caste only*;’—the term ‘*mātra*,’ ‘*only*,’
has a restrictive force; the meaning being ‘he who lives only on the
strength of his Brāhmaṇa-caste, and not by learning and other qualities,
being absolutely devoid of all Brāhmaṇical qualifications.

The term ‘*bruva*,’ ‘*so-called*,’ is deprecatory.—(20)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Brāhmaṇabruvaḥ*’—‘One whose origin is doubtful, but who calls himself
a *Brāhmaṇa*’ (’Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘despicable Brāhmaṇa’
(Medhātithi and Govindarāja);—‘an initiated Brāhmaṇa who does not study
the Veda’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 601);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 22);—in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 200), which supplies the
definition of ‘*brāhmaṇabruvaḥ*’ as ‘the Brāhmaṇa who neither studies
nor teaches (the Veda)—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (9a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, p. 11a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.20-21)**

*Śukranīti* (4.5.27).—‘If the Brāhmaṇa he not learned enough, the King
should appoint a Kṣatriya or Vaiśya learned in the legal law;—but he
shall always avoid the Śūdra.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 601).—(Same as Manu.)

*Vyāsa* (Vyavahāratattva).—‘If the King, leaving the twice-born, tries
law-suits with the assistance of Śūdras, he falls.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

राजाधिकृतविद्वद्ब्राह्मणाभावे सति तत्र शास्त्रवित् क्षत्रियवैश्याधिकारार्थो ऽयम् आरम्भः । न **जातिमात्रोपजीविनः** । कथं कृत्वा । उक्तं हि "तदा नियुञ्ज्याद् विद्वांसं ब्राह्मणं कार्यदर्शने" इति । अत्र ब्राह्मणग्रहणं वर्णत्रयपर्युदासार्थम् इत्य् उक्तम् । एवं च सति तत्प्रतिषेधाद् एव शूद्रप्रतिषेधे सिद्धे पुनः शूद्रप्रतिषेध इह क्रियमाणः क्षत्रियवैश्याभ्यनुज्ञानार्थो विज्ञायते । यस्माद् अकृतकारि हि शास्त्रम् एवं युक्त्यारम्भम् अयुक्तारम्भः भवति । अन्यथा पौनरुक्त्यायुक्त्यारम्भः स्यात् । न च शास्त्रविद्ब्राह्मणाभावे तदभाववैकल्पिकम् अर्थलोपात् जातिमात्रोपजीविनम् अविद्वद्ब्राह्मणम् असमर्थं व्यवहारदर्शने शास्त्रम् अधिकर्तुम् अर्हति । न हि कश्चिल् लोके ऽन्धो रूपदर्शने ऽधिकरोति । एवं च सति नायम् अभाववैकल्पिको ब्राह्मणः । किं तर्हि पर्युदासार्थम् एवेदं वचनं जातिमारोपजी[विनः] । तथा च लोक उभयप्रतिषेध इत्थंभूतेषु वाक्येषु दृश्यते- "कामं विषम् अपि भक्षय, मा चास्य गृहे भुङ्क्थाः" इति । यत् एवम् उभयप्रतिषेधात् क्षत्रियवैश्याभ्यनुज्ञेयम् इति ॥ ८.२० ॥

_एवं च सति_ —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

020	A Brahmana who subsists only by the name of his caste (gati), or one who merely calls himself a Brahmana (though his origin be uncertain), may, at the king's pleasure, interpret the law to him, but never a Sudra.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/021_yasya_shUdras.md">
<details open><summary><h3>021 यस्य शूद्रस् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यस्य शूद्रस् तु कुरुते  
राज्ञो धर्मविवेचनम् ।  
तस्य सीदति तद् राष्ट्रं  
पङ्के गौर् इव पश्यतः  ॥ ८.२१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/021_yasya_shUdras.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The kingdom or that king for whom the investigation of Law is done by a Śūdra, while he himself is looking on, suffers, like the cow in a morass.—(21)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वविधिशेषो ऽयम् अर्थवादः । **यस्य राज्ञः शूद्रो धर्मविवेचनं** धर्मनिर्णयं करोति, **तस्य सीदति** नश्यति **राष्ट्रं** प्रजाः, कर्दमे **गौर् इव** ॥ ८.२१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This is a supplementary declaration to the foregoing Injunction.

The construction is—That king for whom the ‘*investigation of
law*’—*i.e*., decision on legal cases—is made by a *Śūdra* duly
qualified by learning, etc.,—his kingdom,—people,
subjects—‘*suffers*’—is destroyed—‘*like the cow in a
morass*;’—‘*paśyataḥ*’—‘while he is looking on.’—(21)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 601);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(9b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 11a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.20-21)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.20].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **[यस्य शूद्रस् तु कुरुते] राज्ञो धर्मविवेचनम् ।**

ब्राह्मणाधिकारस्थाने,

> **तस्य सीदति तद्राष्ट्रं पङ्के गौर् इव पश्यतः  ॥ ८.२१ ॥**

क्षत्रियवैश्यनियोगस्तुत्यर्थो ऽयं शूद्रप्रतिषेध्[अः । तद्विषयम् एवेदम् अप्य् उ]क्तम् —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

021	The kingdom of that monarch, who looks on while a Sudra settles the law, will sink (low), like a cow in a morass.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/022_yad_rAShTram.md">
<details open><summary><h3>022 यद् राष्ट्रम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यद् राष्ट्रं शूद्र-भूयिष्ठं  
नास्तिकाक्रान्तम् अद्विजम् ।  
विनश्यत्य् आशु तत् कृत्स्नं  
दुर्भिक्ष-व्याधिपीडितम्  ॥ ८.२२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/022_yad_rAShTram.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

That kingdom where there is a majority of Śūdras, which is infested with non-believers and destitute of twice-born people, quickly perishes entirely, becoming afflicted by famine and disease.—(22)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अयम् अपि पूर्ववद् अर्थवाद एव । प्रकरणाच् च शूद्रभूयिष्ठता विवादनिर्णये तु[^१०५] शूद्रविषया द्रष्टव्या । यत्र शूद्रा भूयांसो विवादनिर्णयकारास् तद् **राष्ट्रम् आशु विनश्यति** दुर्भिक्षव्याधिपीडाभिः । राष्ट्रनाशे च राष्ट्रपतेर् नाश इत्य् उक्तं भवति । **नास्तिकाक्रान्तम्** इति दृष्टान्तः । यथा नास्तिकैः परलोकापवादिभिर् लोकायतिकाद्यैर् आक्रान्तम् अधिष्ठितम् अतश् च 


[^१०५]:
     M G DK omit: tu

**अद्विजम्** । न हि नास्तिकानां ब्राह्मणादिभेदो यथार्थः संकीर्णत्वात् । तद् उक्तं वैद्यवणिग्व्यपदेशादिवद् ब्राह्मणादयः । यत्र वा धर्मसंकटे तु न द्विजाः प्रमाणीक्रियन्ते तद् **अद्विजम्** ॥ ८.२२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Like the preceding verse this also is a supplementary declaration.

From the context it is clear that ‘*the majority of Śūdras*’ is meant
with reference to the persons pronouncing judgments upon disputed cases;
and the meaning is that—‘where among persons deciding cases there is a
majority of *Śūdras*, such a kingdom *perishes quickly*, through
sufferings caused by famine and disease’; and it follows that from the
destruction of the kingdom follows that of the king also.

‘*Infested with non-believers*,’—*i.e*., inhabited by such persons as
are materialists, denying the existence of other worlds.

‘*Destitute of twice-born people*’;—‘non-believers’ cannot be regarded
as a class distinct from that of *Brāhmaṇa* and the rest; as that would
lead to a cross-division; as has been declared thus—‘Brāhmaṇas and the
rest come to hear the titles of *physicians, traders* and so forth.’ Or,
the expression ‘*destitute of twice-born people*’ may be taken to mean
‘where twice-born persons are not consulted and trusted in connection
with difficulties relating to the Law.’—(22)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Śūdrabhūyiṣṭham*’—‘Where Śūdras form a majority among judges’
(Medhātithi);—‘where Śūdras, *i*. *e*., disbelievers, form the majority
of inhabitants’ (Kullūka);—‘where Śūdras form the majority among holders
of high office’ (Nandana).

Medhātithi does not explain ‘*Śūdra*’ here as ‘unbelievers’; he has been
misrepresented by Hopkins.
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**शूद्रभूयिष्ठम्** इति धर्मानुशासितृशूद्रभूयिष्ठम् इत्य् अर्थः । एतत्साम्[अर्थ्यात् तद्]राष्ट्रं **नास्तिकाक्रान्तं** भवति । अत्र कारणं वक्ति । यस्माद् अद्विजप्रायं धर्मानुशासितृब्राह्मणरहितम् । युक्तं चैतद् । ईदृग् राष्ट्रं **विनश्यति** । अयम् अपि श्लोकः पूर्ववत् क्षत्रियवैश्यनियोगस्तुत्यर्थः । न तु जातिमात्रनियोगसुत्यर्थ इत्य् उक्तम् । यदा निराकुलो राजा स्वयं व्यवहारं द्रष्टुम् इच्छति, तदा —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

022	That kingdom where Sudras are very numerous, which is infested by atheists and destitute of twice-born (inhabitants), soon entirely perishes, afflicted by famine and disease.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/023_dharmAsanam_adhiShThAya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>023 धर्मासनम् अधिष्ठाय ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

धर्मासनम् अधिष्ठाय  
संवीताङ्गः समाहितः ।  
प्रणम्य लोकपालेभ्यः  
कार्यदर्शनम् आरभेत्  ॥ ८.२३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/023_dharmAsanam_adhiShThAya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having occupied the Judgment-seat, with his body covered and mind collected, he shall salute the Guardian-Deities, and then proceed with the investigation of suits.—(23)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

धर्मः प्रधानः यस्मिन्न् आसने भवति तद् **धर्मासनम्** । राजासने हि राज्यस्थित्यानुगुण्येनार्थम् एव प्रधानीकरोति न्यक्कृत्यापि धर्मम् । व्यवहारनिर्णये तु धर्मम् एव प्रधानं आश्रयेद् इत्य् अर्थः, न पुनर् आश्रयभेदो ऽनेन ज्ञाप्यते । **संवीताङ्गः** वस्त्रादिना स्थगितसरीरः । **प्रणम्य लोकपालेभ्य** इन्द्राद्यष्टौ लोकपालास् तान् नमस्कृत्य **कार्यदर्शनम् आरभेतेत्य्** अदृष्टार्थम् एतद् द्वयम् अङ्गसंवरणं लोकपालप्रणामश् च । **समाहितः** अनन्यचित्तः कार्यदर्शने । एवं हि दृष्टार्थं भवति । प्रणामविशेषणं वा समाहितग्रहणम् । यद्य् अप्य् अत्र किंचिद् उक्तम् एव प्रतिभाति तथापि पद्यग्रन्थत्वान् नातीव पौनरुक्त्यम् । **लोकपालेभ्य** इति चतुर्थी संप्रदाने । कथं । क्रियाग्रहणं संप्रदानसूत्रे चोदितम् "श्राद्धाय निगृह्णते" "पत्ये शेते" (पत् इ- ३३०) इत्याद्यर्थम् । न च क्रियाग्रहणं गृह्णात्यादिविषयम् एव, भाष्ये ऽनुक्तत्वात् ॥ ८.२३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Judgment-seat*,’— that seat upon which the pronouncing of judgments is
the principal work done. When he is seated upon his royal throne, the
king regards ‘wealth’ as conducive to the prosperity of the kingdom, to
be the most important matter, even in preference to ‘morality’; but when
he is engaged in deciding suits, he regards ‘morality’ or ‘Justice’ as
the most important thing;—this is what is implied by the name
‘*judgement-seat*,’ which does not mean that ‘morality’ or ‘Justice’ is
a quality of the ‘scat.’

‘*With his body covered*,’—*i.e*., having his body covered up with cloth
and such other things.

‘*He shall salute the guardian-deities*,’—how down to the eight
‘Guardians of the People, Indra and the rest’;—‘*he shall proceed with
the investigation of suits*.’

These two acts—covering up of the body and saluting the Guardian
deities—are laid down with a view to some transcendental result.

‘*With mind collected*,’— with his mind concentrated, hot turning
towards any other thing. This serves a visible purpose.

Or, the phrase ‘*with collected mind*’ may be taken as modifying the
verb ‘salute.’

Though what is asserted here appears to have been already said before,
yet, in as much as the treatise is a metrical one, repetition cannot he
very strongly objected to.

In ‘*Lokapālebhyaḥ*’ ‘*to the Guardian Deities*,’ the Dative ending
denotes the *recipient of a gift*; since under the *Sutra* dealing with
the Dative, it has been held (by the *Vārtika*) that that also is a
‘recipient’ for whose sake a certain act is done; *e.g*., ‘*śrāddhāya
nigṛhṇate*’ (‘He keeps himself in check for the sake of the performance
of Śrāddhas’), ‘*patye shete*’ (‘Lies down for the sake of her
husband’). Nor can the said assertion he regarded as restricted to the
two roots here mentioned (in the two examples); as no such restriction
is mentioned in the *Bhāṣya*.— (23)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 41) in
*Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 200);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, pp. 2a and
5b);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 70);—and by Jimūtavāhana
(Dāyabhāga, p. 4a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bṛhaspati* (1.21-23).—‘The King having risen early in the morning and
performed ablutions according to rule, and having shown due honour to
elders, astronomers, physicians, deities, Brāhmaṇas and domestic
priests,—should enter the Court-room, decorated with flowers, ornaments
and fine clothes, with a cheerful countenance. Having entered the Court
in the forenoon, together with the elders, ministers and attendants, he
should try cases and listen to the exposition of Purāṇas, Law-Codes and
Rules of Policy.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.85-87).—‘The King should enter the Court modestly,
together with the Brāhmaṇas and the Ministers versed in state-craft,
with the object of investigating cases. He should proceed with the work
after taking the seat of justice.’

*Saṃvarta* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra).—‘Bowing to the Guardians of the
Regions, the King shall enter the splendid Court and carry on the work
of protecting the people by looking into their suits.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

धर्मार्थम् आसनं **धर्मासनम्** । तत्रोपविश्य संवीताङ्ग इत्य् अनुवादात् विनीतवेषाभरणत्वस्यापूर्वगुणसंबन्धेन । **समाहितो** व्यवहारदर्शने । **प्रणम्य लोकपालेभ्यः** सभालेख्यस्थेभ्यः स्वस्थानेभ्यो वा वाङ्मनसाभ्यां **कार्यदर्शनम् आरभेत्** । व्यवहारदिदृक्षोर् दृष्टार्थो ऽयं विधिर् निर्देशो नृपतेः, अदृष्टार्थो वा शास्त्रस्यार्थवत्त्वाय ॥ ८.२३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

023	Having occupied the seat of justice, having covered his body, and having worshipped the guardian deities of the world, let him, with a collected mind, begin the trial of causes.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/024_arthAnarthAv_ubhau.md">
<details open><summary><h3>024 अर्थानर्थाव् उभौ ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अर्थानर्थाव् उभौ बुद्ध्वा  
धर्माधर्मौ च केवलौ ।  
वर्णक्रमेण सर्वाणि  
पश्येत् कार्याणि कार्यिणाम्  ॥ ८.२४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/024_arthAnarthAv_ubhau.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Understanding both ‘desirable’ and ‘undesirable’ to be only ‘Justice’ and ‘Injustice,’ he shall look into all the suits of the suitors, according to the order of the castes.—(24)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**धर्माधर्मव्** एव **केवलाव् अर्थानर्थौ-** न गोहिरण्यादिलाभो ऽर्थस् तद्विपर्ययो वानर्थः । किं तर्हि, धर्म एवार्थो ऽनर्थश् चाधर्म इति **बुद्ध्वा** हृदि निश्चित्य **कार्याणि पश्येत्** । अथ वार्थानर्थाव् अपि बोद्धव्यौ धर्माधर्माव् अपि । धर्मस्य सारता बोद्धव्यार्थस्य फल्गुता । अथ वा यत्र महान् अनर्थः स्वल्पश् चाधर्मस् तत्रानर्थं परिहरेत् । शक्यो हि महतार्थेनेषद् अधर्मो दानप्रायश्चित्तादिना निराकर्तुम् । संनिपाते च व्यवहारिणां बहूनां वर्णक्रम आश्रयितव्यः । एष च दर्शने क्रमो वर्णानां यदा सर्वेषां[^१०६] तुल्यपीडा भवति । यदा त्व् अवरवर्णस्याप्य् आत्ययिकं कार्यं महद् वा तदा "यस्य चात्ययिका पीडा" इत्य् अनेन न्यायेन तद् एव प्रथमं पश्येत् न क्रमम् आद्रियेत । राज्यस्थित्यर्थो हि व्यवहारनिर्णय इत्य् उक्तम् अतो न यथाश्रुतम् आश्रयणीयम् ॥ ८.२४ ॥


[^१०६]:
     M G DK (1: 110): yadārthe
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Justice and Injustice’ alone* are desirable and undesirable. It is not
that the ‘desirable’ consists in the obtaining of cattle, gold and other
things, or that the ‘undesirable’ in the reverse thereof; in fact it is
‘Justice’ that is ‘desirable’ and ‘Injustice’ that is
‘undesirable’;—‘*understanding*’ this—*i.e*., having come to this
conclusion in his mind,—‘*he shall look into the suits*.’

Or, the text may mean that the king shall examine what is ‘desirable,’
and what is ‘undesirable,’—and also what is ‘Justice’ and what is
‘Injustice.’ That is, he should realise the importance of ‘Justice’ and
the unimportance of what is merely ‘desirable;’ or that when the element
of ‘undesirability’ is very large, and that of ‘Injustice’ very
small,—there he shall avoid the former; because it is possible for a
slight ‘Injustice’ to be set aside by the larger ‘desirable’ factor
through gifts and expiatory rites.

In the event of several suitors coming up at the same time, he shall
take them up in the order of their castes; but this order of
investigation based upon castes is to be observed only when the troubles
of all the suitors are of the same degree; when, on the other hand, the
business of the lower caste is very urgent or very important, then this
should he taken up first, in accordance with the maxim ‘he whose trouble
is urgent, etc., etc.’; and in this case the order of the castes is not
to be strictly observed. It has already been said that the investigation
of cases is for the purpose of maintaining order in the kingdom; so that
the rules laid down need not always be followed literally.—(24)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Arthānarthāvubhau buddhvā dharmādharmau ca kevalau*’—Medhātithi has
given three explanations of this (See *Translation*):—‘Fully realizing
the wordly evils and advantages, but paying due heed to Dharma and
Adharma as alone conducive to spiritual results’
(Kullūka);—‘discriminating the righteous and the unrighteous, and taking
up the righteous first’ (Nārāyaṇa and Nandana);—‘knowing what will
please and what displease the people and understanding what is just and
what is unjust’ (Govindarāja).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 46), as laying
down the order in which the king is to take up the cases, when several
come up at the same time;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 80);—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru*, (16b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 19a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Śukranīti* (4.5.113-117).—‘The King with the Ministers after receiving
the plaintiff duly should first console him and then commence the trial,
he should then enquire of the plaintiff standing submissively before him
—*What is your business? What is your complaint? Do not be afraid—by
what ruffian and under what circumstances hare you been molested?*’

*Bṛhaspati* (1.24).—‘Let the King, or a member of the twice-born caste
officiating as Chief-Judge, try causes, acting on principles of equity,
and abiding by the opinion of the judges, and by the doctrine of the
sacred law.’

*Nārada* (1.31, 31, 35).—‘A King who acts justly must reject error when
brought forward, and seek truth alone; because prosperity depends on the
discharge of duty. Therefore let a King, after having seated himself on
the seat of judgment, be equitable towards all beings, discarding
selfish interests and acting the part of Yama Vaivasvata. Attending to
the dictates of the Law, and adhering to the opinion of the Chief-Judge,
he should try causes in due order, exhibiting great care.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Parāśaramādhava- Vyasa, p. 46).—‘Where two complainants
arrive accusing each other and claiming the first hearing, the King
shall admit them, either in the order of their castes, or in accordance
with the comparative seriousness of the complaints.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do.).—‘Between two mutual complainants, that man should be
treated as the plaintiff whose hurt or complaint is more serious,—and
not necessarily the man who appears first before the court.’

*Nārada* (Do.).—(Same as Kātyāyana.)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

राष्ट्रसंप्रसादकोपाव् **अर्थानर्थौ** राज्यतन्त्रानुकूलप्रतिकूलौ, परत्र च **धर्माधर्मौ** दृष्टानपेक्षौ संपश्येत्, कार्यदर्शनम् आचरेत् । यद् वा अर्थानर्थौ वैरानुबन्धेतरनिमित्तौ **बुद्ध्वेति** । संनिपाते च व्यवहाराणां वर्णक्रमेणाश्रयेत् । **पश्येत् कार्याणि कार्यिणाम्** इत्य् उक्तम्- तत् पुनर् व्यवहारदर्शनम् अनुमानतो विशेषेण, यतस् तदर्थम् अभिधीयते —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

024	Knowing what is expedient or inexpedient, what is pure justice or injustice, let him examine the causes of suitors according to the order of the castes (varna).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/025_bAhyair_vibhAvayel.md">
<details open><summary><h3>025 बाह्यैर् विभावयेल् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

बाह्यैर् विभावयेल् लिङ्गैर्  
भावम् अन्तर्गतं नृणाम् ।  
स्वर-वर्णेङ्गिताकारैश्  
चक्षुषा चेष्टितेन च  ॥ ८.२५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/025_bAhyair_vibhAvayel.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall discover the internal disposition of men by external signs: by variations in their voice, colour and aspect, as also by means of the eye and by gestures.—(25)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तथा चेदम् आह । अनुमानेनापि सत्यानृतवादिता व्यवहारतः साक्षिणां च निश्चेतव्या इति श्लोकार्थः । अतश् च स्वरादिग्रहणं प्रदर्शनार्थम् । तेन यन् निश्चितलिङ्गं[^१०७] तेन परिच्छिन्द्याद् इत्य् उक्तं भवति, न पुनः स्वरादिभिर् एव, सव्यभिचारित्वात् तेषाम् । अनुचितसभाप्रेवेशा हि महाप्रकृतिदर्शनेन सत्यकारिणो ऽपि स्वभावतो विक्रियन्ते । प्रगल्भास् तु संवृताकारा भवन्ति । स्वरश् च वर्णश् चेङ्गितं च स्वरवर्णेङ्गितानि, तेषाम् आकाराः **स्वरवर्णेङ्गिताकाराः** । आकारो विकारः । स्वाभाविकानां हि स्वरादीनाम् अन्यथात्वम् । तैर् **विभावयेन्** निश्चिनुयात् । **भावम्** अभिप्रायम् अन्तर्गतं मनुष्याणां विवादिसाक्ष्यादीनाम् । तत्र स्वरस्य विकारो वाचि गद्गदरुदितादि । वर्णस्य गात्ररूपविपर्ययादि । इङ्गितं स्वेदवेपथुरोमाञ्चादि । **चक्षुषा** संभ्रमक्रोधदृष्टिपातेन । **चेष्टितेन** हस्तनिक्षेपभ्रूविक्षेपादिना[^१०८] । स्वसंवेदम्[^१०९] चैतत्, यद् गूह्यमानम् अप्य् अभिप्रायं स्वरादयः प्रकाशयन्ति निपुणतो लक्ष्यमाणाः । यतः प्रसिद्धम् एतेषां गूड्ःआभिप्रायप्रकटनसामर्थ्यम् ॥ ८.२५ ॥


[^१०९]:
     M G: tvasaṃvedam


[^१०८]:
     M G J: -vikṣepādi


[^१०७]:
     DK (1:192): niścitaṃ liṅgaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What the verse means is that in course of the investigations the
veracity or otherwise of witnesses should he found out by means of
Inference also;—and the mention of ‘voice,’ etc., is only by way of
illustration; what the meaning therefore is, is that it shall be
ascertained by means of such sure indiations as may be possible, and not
necessarily only by ‘voice’ and other things mentioned here; for the
simple reason that these latter are not always infallible; *e.g*., in
many cases persons who are not used to the presence of great men become
flurried, even though they be quite truthful; while those that are pert
manage to hide their real feelings.

The compound ‘*svaravarṇeṅgitākāraiḥ*’ is to be expounded as—by the
*ākāra*—variations in—their ‘*svara*,’ ‘voice’—‘*varṇa*’ ‘colour’—and
‘*iṅgita*,’ ‘aspect’;—the ‘change’ referred to being modifications
undergone by men’s ordinary ‘voice’ and the rest

By means of these he shall ‘*discover*’—ascertain—the ‘*internal
disposition*’— intention—‘*of men*’— of suitors and witnesses.

The ‘change of voice’ occurs in the form of *faltering*, being *choked
with tears* and so forth;—that of ‘*colour*’ in the form of sudden
changes of complexion and so forth;—that of ‘*aspect*’ in the shape of
perspiration, trembling, thrilling of hairs and so forth.

‘*By means of the eye*’;—*i.e*., by suddenly casting on them an angry
look.

‘*By gestures*,’—*i.e*., by the movement of the hands, the eye-brows and
so forth.

It is a fact of common experience that voice and the rest, if carefully
watched, disclose the most hidden feelings;—the fact of these being
indicative of hidden feelings being well known among men, as we find in
ordinary experience.—(25)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Iṅgita*’—‘Perspiring, trembling, horripilation and so forth’
(Medhātithi, Govindarāja and Rāghavānanda);—‘casting down the eyes &c,’
(Kullūka);—‘aimlessly moving about the arms &c.’ (Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Ākāra*’—‘Manner’ compounded with ‘*svara-varṇa-iṅgita*’ collectively,
(Medhātithi and Rāghavānanda);—‘aspect, *e.g*., pallor, horripilation,
sweating’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka, and Nārāyaṇa) who take the term
independently—copulatively compounded with ‘*svara*’ &c.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 620);—in *Smṛtitattva* (p. II,
218),... which adds the following notes:—‘*Svara*,’ such as choking
voice,—‘*varṇa*,’ abnormal pallor and so forth,—‘iṅgita,’ *i*. *e*.,
sweating, trembling and horripilation—‘*ākāra*,’
disfigurement,—‘*cakṣuṣ*,’ timid, or piteous look,—‘*ceṣṭita*,’ the
manner of standing and moving. It adds that all these, being uncertain
indications, have to be regarded as inferior to witnesses and other
kinds of direct evidence;—in

*Kṛtykalpataru*, (21b), which has the following notes:—‘*Vibhāvayet*,’
determine, ascertain,—‘*bhāvam*,’ motive, intention, ‘*nṛṇām*,’ of the
two parties and of the witnesses,—‘*ākāra*’ transformation in the
natural voice and other things,—that of ‘*svara*’ appears in the form of
trembling and so forth, that of ‘*varṇa*’ in the shape of paleness and
so forth;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 30a), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Svara*’ stands for the choking of the voice and so
forth,—‘*varṇa*’ for the ‘darkness of complexion,’ and so
forth,—‘*iṅgita*’ for perspiration, trembling and the like,—‘*ākāra*’
for the raising of the eye-brows and so forth—‘*cakṣu*’ for the timid
look,—‘*ceṣṭita*’ for the listless changing of position.—(25)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.25-26)**

*Nārada* (6.10-11).—‘When the face changes colour, or the voice falters,
or the features look suspicious, when they do not give evidence in
public, when they make impossible statements as to place and time, when
there are doubts regarding their place of residence, when they indulge
in expense for bad purposes, when they have been previously convicted of
larceny, when they keep bad company, or when documents speak against
them,—they may be convicted as thieves,—not by the possession of stolen
goods alone.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.13-15).—‘If he shifts his position, licks the ends of
his mouth, perspires in his forehead, his face becomes pale, speech is
dry and halting, talks much and inconsistently, is not pleasant in the
eye or in his speech, twists his lips, the natural condition of his
mind, speech and body becomes changed,—such a person, whether he be a
complainant or a witness, should be regarded as at fault or wicked.’

*Rāmāyaṇa* (Vyavahāratattva, p. 31).—‘The man cannot hide his internal
feelings entirely, without showing some slight shadow of it in his
external appearance; it becomes exposed even against his will.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

स्वरश् च वर्णश् चङ्गितं च **स्वरवर्णेङ्गितानि** । **आकारः** शरीरेन्द्रियवैकृत्यम् । स्वरवर्णेङ्गितानि च तान्य् आकारश् च स्वरवर्णेङ्गिताकाराः । तैः स्वरवर्णेङ्गिताकारैः सामान्यविशेषधर्मेणायं निर्देशः । तत्र वैचित्र्यम् । स्वरवैकृत्यं गद्गदादिः । वर्णो गात्ररूपविपर्ययः । लिङ्गितं स्वेदवेपथुरोमाञ्चादिः । चक्षुषा चक्षुर् विकारेण । चेष्टितेन च हस्तभ्रूविक्षेपादिना । तद् एवम् अर्थिप्रत्यर्थिनोः साक्षिणां वानृतभावभाषितं स्वरादिविपर्ययेण प्रत्यक्षम् अपि वेदनीयं विजानीयात् । सामान्यमात्रोपदेशो ऽयम् । केचित् त्व् आहुः सव्यभिचारत्वाद् अनुमानस्य व्यवहारस्थितिः साक्षिभिः स्यात्, अविद्यमानेषु तु साक्षिष्व् अनुमानम् अप्य् आश्रयणीयम् । तद् एतद् अन्याय्यम् । यद्य् अनुमानं व्यभ्चारि दृष्टं ननु साक्षिवचनागमो ऽपि तथा दृष्टः । अथात्रविवेकयत्नान् निर्णयः । एवम् अनुमानादिष्व् अपि भविष्यति । यदि चानुमानं व्यभिचारि कथम् अविद्यमानेषु साक्षिषु तन्निर्णयार्थम् उपादेयम् इत्य् आचक्षीत । तस्माद् युक्तोपदेशम् अनुमानम् । तथा च कृत्वा व्यवहाराद् अन्यत्रापि लौकिकैः ॥ ८.२५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

025	By external signs let him discover the internal disposition of men, by their voice, their colour, their motions, their aspect, their eyes, and their gestures.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/026_AkArair_ingitair.md">
<details open><summary><h3>026 आकारैर् इङ्गितैर् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

आकारैर् इङ्गितैर् गत्या  
चेष्टया भाषितेन च ।  
नेत्र-वक्त्रविकारैश् च  
गृह्यते ऽन्तर्गतं मनः  ॥ ८.२६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/026_AkArair_ingitair.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The inner mind is indicated by such variations as those of aspect, gait, gesture, speech, and by changes in the eye and the face.—(26)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तथा हि, लोके[^११०] दृष्टशक्तितानेन[^१११] श्लोकेन स्वरादीनां पूर्वोक्तार्थाधिगमेन दर्शयतीत्य् अपौनरुक्त्यम् । तत्राक्रियन्ते विक्रयन्त इत्य् **आकारा** **इङ्गिता**दयः । **इङ्गितं** व्याख्यातम् । व्यक्तिभेदाद् बहुवचनम् । **गतिः** पूर्वश्लोकाद् अत्राधिका । सा प्रस्खलन्ती स्वभावतो ऽन्यथाभूता । **भाषीतं** पौर्वापर्यविरुद्धं वचनम् । **वक्त्रविकार** आस्यविशेषादिः । शेषं पूर्वश्लोक एव व्याख्यातम् । एतैर् विकृतैर् **अन्तर्गतं** चित्तं लौकिकैर् अन्यत्रापि गृह्यत इति समासार्थः ॥ ८.२६ ॥


[^१११]:
     M G: dṛṣṭaśaktito 'nena


[^११०]:
     J places tathā hi loke before verse 26 as an introduction to it.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What this verse does is to support, by ordinary experience, what has
gone in the preceding verse; hence there is no repetition.

‘*Ākāra*’ is that which changes, *variations*; such as *aspect* and the
rest.

‘*Aspect*’ has already been explained; the plural number is used in view
of there being numerous individual aspects.

‘*Gait*,’—this is in addition to what has gone in the preceding verse;
it means the ordinary gait of a man being tripped or otherwise altered.

‘*Speech*’—inconsistent and contradictory statements.

‘*Changes in the face*’—the mouth being parched and so forth.

The rest has all been explained under the previous verse.

By means of the variations of all these the innermost heart is indicated
even in ordinary life; such in brief is the meaning of the verse.—(26)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 260);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 43);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 112);—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (22a), which has the following notes:—‘*Iṅgita*’ stands
for perspiration, thrilling of the hair,—‘*vikāra*’ of the eye, the look
of love or anger,—‘*ceṣṭita*’, throwing about of the hand and so
forth,—‘*gatyā*’ halting gait and so forth;—‘*ceṣṭita*’, inconsistent
and contradictory statements,—‘*vaktra vikāra*’, drying of the mouth
&c—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 30b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.25-26)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.25].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

आकरणं **आकारः** शरीरेन्द्रियविकरः । अस्य सामान्यवचनस्यायं विशेषः । **आकारैः** तैश् तद्विकारैर् इङ्गितादिभिः व्य्वहाराद् अन्यत्रापि चापराभिप्रायो लोके **गृह्यते** । एवं व्यवहारकाले ऽप्य् अधिकृतैर् अद्विष्टैर् अरक्तैश् च निपुणतो दत्तप्रणिधानैर् ग्राह्यम् । एवं च पूर्वश्लोकशेष एवायं विज्ञेयः ॥ ८.२६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

026	The internal (working of the) mind is perceived through the aspect, the motions, the gait, the gestures, the speech, and the changes in the eye and of the face.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/027_bAladAyAdikaM_riktham.md">
<details open><summary><h3>027 बालदायादिकं रिक्थम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

बालदायादिकं रिक्थं  
तावद् राजानुपालयेत् ।  
यावत् स स्यात् समावृत्तो  
यावच् चाऽतीत-शैशवः [मेधातिथिपाठः - यावद् वातीत-शैशवः]  ॥ ८.२७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/027_bAladAyAdikaM_riktham.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king shall take care of the property owned by a minor, till such time as he may return from the teacher’s house, or till he may have passed his minority.—(27)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>
<u>ननु</u> च व्यवहारदर्शनं वक्तव्यतया प्रस्तुतम् । तत्र कः प्रसङ्गो बालधनरक्षायाः । 

<u>उच्यते</u> । विवादपदताम् एवैतद् विषयान् निवर्तयितुम् इदम् आरभ्यते[^११२] । बालधनं राज्ञा स्वधनवत् परिपालनीयम् । अन्यथा पितृव्यादिबान्धवा मयेदं रक्षणीयं मयेदम् इति विवदेरन् । न चान्यः प्रसङ्गो ऽस्ति । आशङ्क्यमानव्यवहारवच् च । न केवलेषु राजधर्मेषूपदिश्यते अतो ऽस्मिन्न् एवावसरे वक्तव्यम्[^११३] । बालो दायादो ऽस्य तद् इदं **बालदायादिकम्** । दायादः स्वाम्य् अत्रोच्यते । बालस्वामिकं धनं **तावद्** **राजा** रक्षेद् **यावद्** असौ **समावृत्तः** गुरुकुलात् प्रत्यागतः **यावद् वातीतशैशवः** अतिक्रान्तबालभावः । अयं च विकल्पः । यो गृहशैशवो भवति तदर्थम् अतीतशैशवम् उच्यते । यस् तु व्रतकः स निवृत्ते ऽपि शैशवे[^११४] आ समावर्तनात् प्रतिपाल्यधनः स्यात् । अथ वा द्विजातीनां समावर्तनम् अवधिः, अन्येषां शैशवात्ययः ॥ ८.२७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

An objection is raised—“The subject that was introduced was the
investigation of suits; where then was the occasion for the protecting
of the property of minors?”

*Answer*.—This subject has been introduced here, just with a view to
show that the property of minors does not come within the scope of legal
proceedings; it has to be protected by the king, like his own property;
otherwise the minor’s uncles and other relatives would quarrel among
themselves, each asserting—‘I shall take care of it.’ There is no
connection of this subject with the present context. It has had to be
introduced here,—and not along with the exclusive ‘Duties of the
King,’—because in regard to this people may have the notion that even
such property may form the subject of legal proceedings.

‘*Bāladāyādi*’—that of which a minor is the ‘*dāyāda*,’ *i.e., owner*,
in which sense the term is used here. The property owned by minors shall
be taken care of by the king, till such time as he may return from the
teacher’s house, or till he may have passed his minority. This second
alternative of passing the minority is meant for those who pass their
childhood in their own home (and are not handed over to an *Ācārya*). In
the case of one however who has entered the teacher’s house as a
Religious Student, even though he may have passed his minority, his
property shall have to be looked after until he returns from the
teacher’s house. Or, the meaning may he that in the case of twice-born
persons, the ‘return’ shall be the limit, while in that of others, it
shall be the ‘passing of minority.’—(27)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 598), which explains
‘*Bāladāyāgatam*’ as ‘belonging to a minor’ and ‘*ānupālayet*’ as
‘should guard it against co-parceners’;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p.
244).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (10.48).—‘The property of infants must be protected until they
attain their majority or complete their studentship.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.8-9).—‘The King shall protect the property of persons
unfit to transact business;—but when a minor comes of age, his property
must be made over to him.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.65, Vivādaratnākara, p. 598).—‘The King shall protect the
property of infants, of people without protectors and of women.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 599).—‘The King shall protect the property of
infants, of persons unable to transact business, and of the wives of the
Vedic Scholar and the Warrior. Ownerless properties revert to the King.’

*Baudhāyana* (Do.).—‘Until sons are able to transact, business, they
shall keep their property along with the accrued profits carefully till
they attain majority.’

*Agnipurāṇa* (Rājadharma, 222.18-19).—(Same as Manu, reading
‘*bālaputrāsu*’ in place of ‘*baśāputrāsu*.’)

*Kātyāyana* (Do.).—‘If a man dies leaving an infant, son, the relations
shall protect his property.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

रिक्थ] इति नित्यं धनम्, समासार्थः । एवं च सत्य् अमातृपितृको ऽयम् अनाथः सामर्थ्याद् विज्ञायते । यतस् तद्धनं तावद् राज्ञा रक्ष्यमाणं तिष्ठेत् यावद् अयं **समावृत्तः** । समावृत्तिस् त्व् अस्य संव्यवहारक्षमत्वोपलक्षणार्थः । एवं च सति समावृत्तम् अपि शिशुं सन्तं न प्रतिपादयेद् असमर्थम् अववित्तसं[व्यवहारे । यावद् वातीतशैशवः], असमावृत्तो ऽपि । सामर्थ्यापेक्षत्वात् प्रतिपादयेद् इत्य् उक्तम् । अनाथवित्तसंरक्षणोपदेशप्रकरणाद् इदम् अन्यम् उच्यते तद्रूपम् ॥ ८.२७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

027	The king shall protect the inherited (and other) property of a minor, until he has returned (from his teacher's house) or until he has passed his minority.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/028_vashAputrAsu_chaivam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>028 वशापुत्रासु चैवम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वशापुत्रासु चैवं स्याद्  
रक्षणं निष्-कुलासु च ।  
पति-व्रतासु च स्त्रीषु  
विधवास्व् आतुरासु च  ॥ ८.२८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/028_vashAputrAsu_chaivam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

There shall be similar protection in the case of barren women, of son-less women, of women devoted to their husbands, and of widows faithful to their husbands,—when their family is extinct, and when they are in distress.—(28)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यः कश्चिद् अनाथस् तस्य सर्वस्य धनं राजा यथावत् परिरक्षेत् । तथा चोदाहरणमात्रं **वशा**दयः । एवं प्रजापालनम् अनुष्ठितं भवति । पूर्वस् तु श्लोकः कालनियमार्थः । **वशा** वन्ध्या । **अपुत्रा** असमर्थपुत्रा अविद्यमानपुत्रा दुर्गतपुत्रा वा । वशाश् चापुत्राश् चेति द्वन्द्वः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च वशाप्य् अपुत्रैव । 

<u>सत्यम्</u> । उभयोपादानं तु सत्य् अपि भर्तरि तस्याः संरक्षणार्थम् । तस्यां ह्य् अधिविन्नायां भर्ता निरपेक्षो भवति ।   
**निष्कुला**ग्रहणं तासां विशेषणम् । यासां न कश्चिद् देवरपितृव्यमातुलादिः[^११६] परिरक्षको ऽस्ति, स्त्रीत्वाच् च स्वयम् असमर्थाः, बान्धवास् तु मत्सरिणः, तासां एतद्[^११७] उच्यते । बन्धुभिर् हि स्त्रीणां शीलशरीरधनानि रक्षितव्यानि । तद् उक्तम् ।



[^११७]:
     M G: ca tad


[^११६]:
     M G: - mātulādi-

- विनियोगो ऽस्ति रक्षासु भरणे च स ईश्वरः ।

- परिक्षीणे पतिकुले निर्मनुष्ये निराश्रये ॥

- तत्सपिण्डेषु वासत्सु पितृपक्षः प्रभुः स्त्रियाः ।

- पक्षद्वयावसाने तु राजा भर्ता प्रभुः स्त्रियाः ॥ (न्स्म् १३.२७–२९)

- या तु स्वयम् एव कथंचिच् छक्ता, न तत्र बान्धवानां व्यापारो ऽस्ति । अत एवाह- **आतुरास्व्** इति । असामर्थ्यम् एतेन लक्ष्यते ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्यैस् त्व् आतुरभर्तृका आतुरा व्याख्याता । अविधवापि भर्तुर् असामर्थ्याद् राज्ञैव रक्ष्या स्याद् इति । निर्मनुष्याणाम् एतत् । कुलं बन्धुजातं यासां नास्ति ताः **निष्कुलाः** ।

<u>अन्ये</u> तु कुलटां निष्कुलाम् आहुः । तासाम् अपि वेशाद्युपार्जितं धनम् अपतितानां राज्ञा रक्ष्यम् । अस्मिंश् च पक्षे स्वतन्त्रनिष्कुलाग्रहणम् ।  
**पतिव्रतासु** **विधवासु** । मृतभर्तृका विधवा । धव इति भर्तृनाम । तद्विरहिता विधवा । सा[^११८] चेत् पतिव्रता भवति[^११९] । तदा सा रक्ष्यधना[^१२०] । व्यभिचाररतानां तु स्त्रीधनानर्हत्वं स्मृत्यन्तरे पठ्यते-



[^१२०]:
     DK: tā rakṣyadhanāḥ


[^११९]:
     M G DK: bhavanti


[^११८]:
     M G DK (1:1951): tāś

- अपकारक्रियायुक्ता निर्लज्जा चार्थनाशिका ।

- व्यभिचाररता या च स्त्रीधनं न तु सार्हति ॥ इति ।

तस्यास् तु निष्काशनं विहितम् । निष्काशनं च प्रधानवेश्मनो बहिरवस्थापनम्, न तु निर्वासनम् एव । यतः पतितानाम् अपि तासां गृहान्तिके वासो भकाच्छादनमात्रदानं च विहितम्-

- एवम् एव विधिं कुर्याद् योषित्सु पतितास्व् अपि ।

- वस्त्रान्नपानं देयं च वसेयुश् च गृहान्तिके ॥ (म्ध् ८.१८७)

तेन यः कश्चित् स्त्रीणां निर्वासनविधिः "स्त्रीधनं द्रव्यसर्वस्वम्" इत्यादिषु श्रूयते, स एवंविषय एव द्रष्टव्यः । तथापि याद्वद् भिक्षोत्सर्पणादिना किंचिद् अर्जितं तद् अर्हत्य् एव, न बान्धवा अपहरेयुः । इह त्व् अस्मिन्न् एव निमित्ते आधिवेदनं विहितम्, न तु स्त्रीधनापहारः । तथा ह्य् आह-

- मद्यपासाधुवृत्ता च प्रतिकूला च या भवेत् ।

- व्याधिता चाधिवेत्तव्या हिंस्रार्थघ्नी च सर्वदा ॥ (म्ध् ९.८०)

अतश् च मानवस्मृतिबलेन च "स्त्रीधनं न तु सार्हति" इत्य् एषा स्मृतिर् एव व्याख्यायते । आधिवेदनिकं स्त्रीधनम् एषा नार्हति, नैतस्यै देयम् इत्य् अर्थः । यद् उक्तम्- "अधिविन्नस्त्रियै दद्याद् आधिवेदनिकं समम्" (य्ध् २.१५२) इति, न तु प्राग्दत्तम् अस्या अपहर्तव्यम् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;वयं तु ब्रूमः । पुरुषद्वेषिण्या व्यभिचाररतायाश् च युक्त एवापहारः । यत इहाप्य् उक्तम्-

- अतिक्रामेत् प्रमत्तं या मत्तं रोगार्तम् एव वा ।

- स त्रीन् मासान् परित्याज्या विभूषणपरिच्छदा ॥ (म्ध् ९.७८)

भूषणपरिच्छदैर्[^१२१] वियुक्ता कर्तव्येत्य् अर्थः ॥ ८.२८ ॥


[^१२१]:
     M G: vibhūṣaṇa-; the explanation takes vi- into viyuktā.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Whoever may be without a protector, that person’s property shall he
taken care of by the king; the ‘barren’ women and the rest being
mentioned only by way of illustration. It is only thus that the
‘protection of the people’ becomes accomplished. The preceding verse
lays down the period of time during which the said protection of the
property is necessary.

‘*Vaśā*’—barren woman.

‘*Sonless woman*’—one who has no son, or whose son is incapable, or
whose son is in a bad condition.

Between *vaśā* and *aputrā* we have the copulative compound.

“The *barren woman* also is *sonless*.”

True, but both have been mentioned for the purpose of showing that even
though her husband he alive, the said woman may be looked after; as on
account of her being superseded (by another wife taken by her husband),
her husband may neglect her.

‘*Whose family is extinct*’;—this is added with a view to indicate those
who have no protector in the shape of husband’s younger brother, or
paternal or maternal uncle, and being women, are themselves incapable of
looking after their own property,—and whose other relations are jealous
of her property. Otherwise, as a rule, the character and property of
women should be looked after by her relations; as has been thus
declared—‘On the husband lies the burden of supporting and protecting
the woman, for which he is capable; when the husband’s family becomes
extinct, and there is no man left and no standing, and there are no
Sapiṇḍas even left, her father’s people become her protectors; when both
families are extinct, the king is the supporter and protector of the
woman’ (*Nārada*, 13-28 to 29).

When the woman herself is, somehow, capable of taking care of herself,
then there is nothing done by the relations; it is in view of this that
the text has added —‘*of women in distress*’;—this epithet indicating
*inability*. Others have explained the term ‘*women in distress*’ to
mean ‘those whose husbands are in distress’;—even a woman whose husband
is alive becomes a tit object for the king’s care, if her husband is
incapable of taking care of her. This applies to the case of women in
whose family there are no men left to take care of them. The epithet
‘*whose family is extinct*’ thus means ‘those who have *no family*,
*i.e*., relations.’

Others have explained the term ‘*niṣkulā*’ to mean the *misbehaved
woman*; of those women also the property acquired by means of their
beauty has to be protected by the king.

According to this explanation the term ‘*niṣkulā*’ has to be taken by
itself (and not as qualifying the other terms).

‘*Widows faithful to their husbands*’;—‘*vidhavā*,’ ‘widow,’ is one
whose husband is dead;—‘*dhava*’ being a synonym for ‘husband’; and she
who is deprived of the *dhava* is ‘*vidhavā*,’ ‘*widow*.’ Till such time
as she remains faithful to her husband, she deserves to have her
property looked after by the king. In the event of her being unfaithful,
she does not deserve to have any property at all, as we read in another
*Smṛti text*—‘She who is bent upon doing injury, who is devoid of
modesty, who wastes money, who is addicted to misconduct—such a woman
does not deserve to have property.’ Such a woman is to be banished; and
this ‘banishment’ shall be only in the form of being driven away from
the main apartment of the home, and not in being driven away entirely;
because even in the; case of such women as have become outcasts the
scriptures have laid down that they shall be; provided with a separate
dwelling-house, clothing and food:—‘In the case of outcast women also,
this same action should be taken; clothing, food and water should be
provided for them and they should live near the house.’ In view of this,
wherever.we find an injunction regarding the *banishment* of such
women,—*e.g*., in such texts as ‘the woman’s entire property, etc.,
etc.,’—the ‘banishment’ should be understood to be of the nature just
explained. And she deserves to retain what she may have saved from the
fond that is granted her; this the relatives shall not take away.

So far as the present treatise (of Manu) is concerned, in regard to such
women what has been proscribed is *supersession*, and not. the
confiscation of property; as has been declared (under 9.80)—^(‘)She who
drinks wine, misbehaves, or is disobedient, or diseased, or mischievous,
or wasteful, shall always he superseded.’ Hence on the strength of
Manu’s text, the above-quoted text as to the; unfaithful wife not
deserving any property has to be explained as follows:

“Such a woman shall not receive that property which she should have
received on account of her super-session; that is, she shall not receive
what has been enjoined as to be; given to her in the following text—‘To
the superseded wife shall he given a compensation for her supersession.’
But what may have been given to her before that shall not be taken away
from her.”

Our opinion however is that in the case of the woman who is inimical to
her husband, or addicted to misbehaviour, confiscation of property is
only right, and proper; since in Manu also (9.78) it has been declared
that—‘She who disregards her husband when she is maddened, or drunk, or
diseased, shall be abandoned for three months, having been deprived of
her ornaments and clothes’;—*i.e*., she shall be deprived of her
ornaments and clothes before being abandoned.—(28)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Niṣkulāsu*’—‘Those women who have no brother-in-law, or uncle to take
care of them’ (Medhātithi and

Rāghavānanda);—‘harlots’ (‘others’ in Medhātithi);—‘those *maidens*
whose family is extinct’ (Govindarāja);—‘those who have no Sapiṇḍas’
(Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 512), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Vaśā*’, barren woman,—‘*aputrā*’, one who has lost
her son,—‘*Niṣkulā*’ one who has lost all her paternal and maternal
relations.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (3.65).—(See under 27.)

*Agnipurāṇa* (Rājadharma, 222.20).—(Same as Manu.)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

वशा वन्द्या, अपुत्रा स्त्रीप्रजा मृतप्रजा वा उभे अपि चैते सामर्थ्याद् विधवे विज्ञेये । निष्कुला कन्याइवापितृमातृका । पतिव्रता [भर्त्रभावे ऽव्यभिचारिणी । विधवा भर्तृरहिता] । विधवापतिव्रता सामर्थ्याद् गृह्यते, प्रोषितपुत्रा वा । एतासाम् अपि यत् स्त्रीधनं भर्तृधनं वा तद् अपि राज्ञा स्वबन्धुभ्यो रक्षितव्यम् । यथा बा[लरक्थस्य तथानाथधन्]आनाम् एव च राज्ञा सामान्यतो रक्षणं कर्तव्यम् इत्य् अनुशासनम् । अनाथानां त्व् अत्र विशेषेणोपदेशो युक्त आदरार्थः ॥ ८.२८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

028	In like manner care must be taken of barren women, of those who have no sons, of those whose family is extinct, of wives and widows faithful to their lords, and of women afflicted with diseases.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/029_jIvantInAn_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>029 जीवन्तीनान् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

जीवन्तीनां तु तासां ये  
तद् धरेयुः स्वबान्धवाः ।  
ताञ् शिष्याच् चौरदण्डेन  
धार्मिकः पृथिवीपतिः  ॥ ८.२९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/029_jIvantInAn_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

While these women are alive, if their relatives should appropriate their property,—on them the righteous king shall inflict the punishment of thieves.—(29)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

बान्धवानां स्त्रीधनम् अपहरताम् अयं **चोरदण्डः** । ते हि बहुभिर् उपधाभिर् अपहरन्ति । अस्वतन्त्रैषा स्त्री किं ददाति किं वा भुङ्क्ते वयम् अत्र स्वामिन इति अचौराशङ्कया चोरदण्डो विधीयते । **जीवन्तीनां** **तासां स्वबान्धवा** देवरादयस् तद्धनं **ये हरेयुस् ताञ् छिष्यात्** **पृथिवीपतिर्** निगृह्णीयात् । चौरदण्डो[^१२२] वक्ष्यमाणः-


[^१२२]:
     M G DK (1:1952): coradaṇḍo

- येन येन यथाङ्गेन स्तेनो नृषु विचेष्टते । 

- छेत्तव्यं तत् तद् एवान्यत् तन् मनोर् अनुशासनम् ॥ इति । (म्ध् ८.३३४)

स्वबन्धुभ्यश् चैतद् विशेषेण राज्ञा रक्षितव्यम् । चौररक्षा तु स्वराष्ट्रविषया विहिता ॥ ८.२९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This ‘punishment of thieves’ has been laid down for those relatives who
should appropriate the property of women. They appropriate her property
in manifold wavs; giving out., for instance, that—‘she is not mistress
of herself as regards what she gives away and what she enjoys,—I am the
real owner of the; property.’

It is in view of the possibility of people thinking that such
misappropriators are not ‘thieves’ that the text lays down the
‘punishment of thieves’ for them.

‘*While they are alive, if the relations*’—brother-in-law and
others—‘*should appropriate their property*,—*on them the king shall
inflict punishment*,’—shall punish them.

The ‘punishment of thieves’ is going to be described later on (verse
334)—‘With whatever limb a thief operates against men, each of those
limbs the King shall cut off, in order to prevent the repetition of the
act.’

What the verse means is that the property of helpless women should be
specially guarded against her own relations; guarding against thieves
being the duty that has been laid down for the King as owing to the
entire kingdom.—(29)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.147), in support of the view
that except the husband, no co-parcener should lay hands upon the
property of women during their life-time;—in *Aparārka* (p. 752), to the
effect that when the woman is *dead*, her relations do have a right to
her *Strīdhana* property;—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 512); and in
*Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 70).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 752).—‘While the woman is alive, her husband
or sons or brother-in-law or relations have no power over her
*strīdhana*; if they take it from her, they should be punished.’

*Agnipnrāṇa* (Rājadharma, 222.21).—(Same as Manu.)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

जीवद्वचनान् मृतानां तासां बान्धवा एव यथा संनिकर्षं तदीयधनस्येषत इति ज्ञापयति । वक्ष्यति चानपत्यधनस्य सपिण्डादिषु प्रतिपत्तिम् । अत एव च चोरशङ्कायां चोरवत् ते दण्डम् अर्हन्ति । इदं चान्यद् इत्थंभूतम् एव प्रसङ्गाद् उच्यते —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

029	A righteous king must punish like thieves those relatives who appropriate the property of such females during their lifetime.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/030_praNaShTa-svAmikaM_riktham.md">
<details open><summary><h3>030 प्रणष्ट-स्वामिकं रिक्थम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

प्रणष्ट-स्वामिकं रिक्थं  
राजा त्र्यब्दं निधापयेत् ।  
अर्वाक् त्र्यब्दाद् धरेत् स्वामी  
परेण नृपतिर् हरेत्  ॥ ८.३० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/030_praNaShTa-svAmikaM_riktham.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Property, the owner whereof has disappeared, the King shall keep for three years; up to three years the owner may receive it; but after that the King (shall take it).—(30)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद् द्रव्यं स्वामिनो **नष्टं** प्रमादात् कथंचित् पथि गच्छतो भ्रष्टम्, अरण्ये कान्तारे वा स्थापयित्वारण्यपालैर् अन्यैर् वा राजपुरुषैर् लब्धं राजसकाशम् आनीतम्, तद् राज्ञा[^१२३] रक्षां कृत्वा राजद्वारे राजमार्गे वा प्रकाशं स्थापयितव्यम् । पटहघोषणेन वा कस्य किं हारितम् इति प्रकाशयितव्यम् । यतः प्रदेशाल् लब्धं तस्मिन्न् एव प्रदेशे रक्षिपुरुषाधिष्ठितं कर्तव्यम् । एवं **त्रीणि** वर्षाणि स्थापयितव्यम् । तत्र्**आर्वाक्** **त्रिभ्यो** वर्षेभ्यो यः कारणत आत्मीयं ज्ञापयेत् तस्योद्धृतवक्ष्यमाणषड्भागादिभागकं समर्पयितव्यम्, परतः स्वकोष्ठे प्रवेशनीयाम् इति ।


[^१२३]:
     M G DK (1: 1953) add: svāṃ

- प्रनष्टः स्वामी यस्य रिक्थस्य तत् **प्रनष्टस्वामिकम् ।** **प्रनष्टो** ऽविज्ञातः । **रिक्थं** धनम् । त्रयाणाम् अब्दानां समाहारस् **त्र्यब्दम् ।** त्रिवर्षवत् त्र्यब्दे ङीबभावः । अब्दशब्दः संवत्सरपर्यायः । **निधापयेत्** स्थापयेत् । **अर्वाक् त्र्यब्दात्** पूर्वं त्रिभ्यो वर्षेभ्यः, **हरेत् स्वामी** स्वीकुर्यात् । **अर्वाक्**शब्दो ऽवधौ दिग्देशादिकात् पूर्वम्[^१२४] आह ।


[^१२४]:
     M G DK: digdeśādikān pūrvān

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु **नृपतिर् हरेद्** इति भोगानुज्ञानम् अपहारम् आहुः । न हि ऊर्ध्वम् अपि त्रिभ्यो वर्षेभ्यः परकीयस्य द्रव्यसापहारो युक्तः । तस्मात् त्रिभ्यो वर्षेभ्य ऊर्ध्वम् अनागच्छति स्वामिनि राज्ञा[^१२५] भोक्तव्यम् । 


[^१२५]:
     J: rājñā svāmini 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;तैर्[^१२६] अयं श्लोकः कथं व्याख्यानीयः- "यत् किंचिद् दशवर्षाणि" (म्ध् ८.१४७) इति । यदि च परकीयस्यापहारो न युक्त इत्य् उच्यते भोगो ऽपि नैव युक्तः । परकीयं[^१२७] वस्त्रादिवद् भुज्यमानं नश्यत्य् एव । तत्रानपहारोपचारो युक्तः, भुक्तेर्[^१२८] एवापहारफलस्य सद्भावात् । गजतुरगादेस्[^१२९] तु कीदृशो भोग इति वाच्यम् । तस्मान् न यथाश्रुतार्थत्यागे कारणम् अस्ति । हरतिश् च गृह्णात्यर्थे असकृद् दृष्टप्रयोग **ऋक्थं हरेद्** इत्यादौ । तस्त्मात् **परेण नृपतिर् हरेत्** स्वीकुर्याद् इत्य् अयम् एवार्थः ॥ ८.३० ॥


[^१२९]:
     M G: japamudrādes


[^१२८]:
     M G DK: tatrānapahāravācoyuktir evāpahāraphalasya


[^१२७]:
     M G: parakīyasya


[^१२६]:
     M G: tad

_कथं पुनः स्वामी प्रनष्टे धने स्वामित्वं ज्ञापयेत् । अत_[^१३०] _आह_ ।


[^१३०]:
     M G DK: jñāpayitum alam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When some one has lost something,—it having dropped on the ground while
he was going along the road, or in the forest,—and the conservator of
the forests, or some other official of the King, finds it and brings it
to the King,—the King shall arrange for its safe keeping and have it
kept exposed to view at the royal gate or on the public road, and made
it known by heat of drum if any one has lost anything; or he shall have
it kept in charge of keepers on the spot where it was found. For three
years he shall thus keep it.

Then, before the lapse of three years, if some one reports with proofs
that the property belongs to him, then it should he made over to him,
after deducting the sixth part of it, which is said (in verse MM) to be
the King’s share; and after the lapse of three years the King shall take
the property into his own treasury.

That ‘*riktha*,’ ‘property,’ is said to be ‘*praṇaṣṭasvāmika*,’ of which
the owner has ‘*disappeared*’—*i.e*., cannot he traced.

‘*Tryabdam*’ denotes the *aggregate of three years*; the feminine affix
being absent, just as it is in the compound ‘*trivarṣam*.’ The term
‘*abda*’ is synonymous with ‘year.’

‘*Shall keep*’—shall have it deposited.

‘*Up to three years*,’—*i.e*., before the period of three years is
over,—‘*the owner may receive it*,’—assert, his ownership.

The term ‘*arvāk*,’ ‘*up to*’ denotes *limit*, and indicates priority of
time or place.

Others have explained the sentence ‘*the king shall lake it*’ to convey
the permission to him to enjoy the property. What these people mean is
that even after the lapse of throe years, it would, not be right for the
King to ‘take’ or possess what belongs to another person; and hence what
is meant is that after the lapse of three years, if the lightful owner
does not turn up, the King shall enjoy the usufruct of the property.

But how will these people explain the verse ‘Whatever an owner sees
enjoyed by others during ten years, and though present, says nothing,
that he shall not recover’ (8.117)? Further, if it he asserted that the
‘taking away’ of another man’s property cannot be right,—then the
*using* also of such property cannot be right. Specially as another
man’s property in the shape of clothing and the like, becomes unfit by
use. For these reasons it is only right that the mention of ‘taking
away’ should he taken to mean actual *possession*; specially as
*enjoyment*, which is the fruit of *possession*, would be present
(according to the other view also). Then again, what sort of ‘enjoyment
of usufruct’ would there ho in the case of such property as the
elephant, the house and the like?

Thus then, there is no reason for abandoning the direct literal meaning
of the words; specially as the root ‘*hṛ*,’ ‘to take away,’ has often
been found to be used in the sense of *possession*, as in such phrase
‘*riktham haret*,’ ‘shall take possession of the property.’ Hence what
the sentence means is that after three years the King shall
‘take’—*i.e*., take possession of—the property.—(30)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This rule is meant for only such property as does not belong to a
Brāhmaṇa—says Nandana.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 778), which notes that the rule
(relating to the keeping of the property for three years) pertains to
the case of property belonging to Brāhmaṇas with exceptional
qualifications;—in *Mitākṣarā* on 2.38, which notes that the meaning is
that for three years, the property must be kept in safe custody; if the
owner turns up before the lapse of one year, the entire property should
be handed over to him; but if he turns up after one year then a portion
of the property is to be taken by the king as fee for keeping it; the
proportion being specified below in verse 33; it adds that the last
clause, permits the king to spend the property after three years, only
in the case of the owner not turning up at all.—It is quoted again under
1.173, where it is noted that the period of three years is meant for the
case of the owner being a Brāhmaṇa ‘endowed with learning and
character.’

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 226), which notes that this only
permits the king to *make use* of the property (not to make it his own).
In view of what the *Mitākṣarā* and *Aparārka* have said, it is
interesting to note that *Madnapārijāta* reads ‘*abdam*’ and ‘*abdāt*’,
which clearly puts down the period as *one year* only.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 87), which also notes that the
rules refer to the property of a Brāhmaṇa learned in the Veda.

This is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 266), which adds the
following notes:—Reading this text along with *Yājñavalkya* (2-33), we
take the rule to be that, if the owner turns up before the lapse of one
year, the entire property should be made over to him, but if after that,
the king should take from it his own share;—for three years he should
keep the property in the same condition in which it was found; and after
that he is permitted to spend out of it;—and if the owner turns up after
three years, then the king should take out of it his own share, which
should be equal to that of the owner,—giving the fourth part of the
royal share to the man who found the property.

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Āhnika, p. 36a and Vyavahāra, p. 27b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (10.36-38).—‘Those who find lost, property, the owner of which
is not known, shall report it to the King. The King shall cause it to be
proclaimed and hold it in his custody for a year. After that one-fourth
of the value of the property goes to the finder and the remainder to the
King.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.19-20).—‘Property entirely given up goes to the King. If
it be otherwise, the King with his ministers and the citizens shall
administer it.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.33).—‘The property lost and found, the King shall make
over to him to whom it belongs; if he fails to substantiate with proofs
his claim to it, he shall he punished with fine equal to the value of
the property.’

Do. (2.172).—‘If a man obtains from another person the property that had
been stolen or lost,—without reporting it to the King—he should he fined
96 *Paṇas*.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.173).—‘When a stolen or lost property is brought to the
King by the customs-officers or by village-officers, the owner thereof
shall get it if he turns up before one year; after that the King shall
take it himself.’

*Agnipurāṇa* (Rājadharma, 222.16-17).—(Same as Manu.)

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 96).—‘If the owner of the lost property proves his
ownership, he obtains what had been lost and recovered. If he fails to
prove his ownership, he is fined the fifth part of the value of the
article: and the article becomes the lawful property of the King; if the
owner takes forcible possession of the article lost and found, he is to
he fined the first amercement. Property lost and found should remain
deposited in the Customs Office; and after three fortnights, it is to he
handed over to the rightful owner or surrendered to the royal treasury.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

परेण त्र्यब्दान् नष्टस्वामिकस्य धनस्य राज्ञो भोगानुज्ञा, नापहरणम् अस्य । येनोर्ध्वम् अपि त्र्यब्दात् स्वामिन्य् आगते न युक्तं तद् अपहर्तुम्, न हि शक्यं न्यायविरोधेन शास्त्रविरोधेन चार्थकल्पनायां परस्वग्रहणम् अभ्यनुज्ञातुम् । न चार्वाक् त्र्यब्दाद् धरेत् स्वामीत्य् अनेनोर्ध्वं त्र्यब्दात् स्वामिनो ऽस्वामित्वम् इत्य् उच्यते । किं तर्हि परेण नृपतिर् हरेद् इत्य् अस्य भोगो ऽतिसर्गविधेर् वा संबन्धो ऽनूद्यते वाक्यस्वाभाव्यात् । एवं च सत्य् ऊर्ध्वम् अपि त्र्यब्दाद् आगत्य —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

030	Property, the owner of which has disappeared, the king shall cause to be kept as a deposit during three years; within the period of three years the owner may claim it, after (that term) the king may take it.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/031_mamedam_iti.md">
<details open><summary><h3>031 ममेदम् इति ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ममेदम् इति यो ब्रूयात्  
सो ऽनुयोज्यो यथाविधि ।  
संवाद्य रूप-सङ्ख्यादीन्  
स्वामी तद् द्रव्यम् अर्हति  ॥ ८.३१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/031_mamedam_iti.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who says ‘this is mine’ should be questioned in proper form; and the owner ought to receive the property after having correctly described the colour, the number and other details regarding it.—(31)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**यः** कश्चिद् आगत्य "**ममेदं** स्वं द्रव्यम्" **इति ब्रूयात्,** **सो ऽनुयोज्यो यथाविधि** । **अनुयोज्यः** प्रष्टव्य इत्य् अर्थः । को ऽसाव् अनुयोगविधिः । "को भवान्, किं द्रव्यं हारितम्, किंरूपम्, किंपरिमाणम्, किंसंख्याकम्, संपतितम् अपतितं वा, यदि पतितं कस्मिन् देशे, तथा कुत आगमितं त्वया" इत्य् एवं पर्यनुयोगः कर्तव्यः । स यदि संवादयति **रूपसंख्यादीन्** । रूपं प्राणिवस्त्रादिविषयं शुक्लं वस्त्रं [^१३१]गौर् वेत्येवमादि । तथा संख्या दश गावो वा युगानि वा । **आदि**ग्रहणाद् धस्तादिप्रमाणं सुवर्णादिपरिमाणं प्रकीर्णरूपकं वा । एतत् सर्वं संवादयति तदासौ स्वामी भवति । अतस् तद् **द्रव्यम् अर्हति** स्वीकर्तुम् । संवाद उच्यते- यादृशम् एकेन प्रमाणेन परिच्छिन्नं तादृशम् एव यद्य् अनेन[^१३२] परिच्छिद्यते । रूपसंख्यादिग्रहणं च प्रदर्शनार्थं स्वामित्वकारणानाम् अन्येषाम् अपि साक्ष्यादीनाम् ॥ ८.३१ ॥


[^१३२]:
     M G J: evāsyānena


[^१३१]:
     DK (4: 1340) suggests adding: śuklā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The author explains in what, manner the rightful owner shall establish
bis ownership over the lost property.

Whenever any one comes and says ‘this is my property,’ ‘*he should be
questioned* *in* *proper form*.’—‘*Questioned*,’ *i.e*., examined.

“What is the *proper form* of questioning?”

The questioning could be done in the following manner:—What is the
article that has been lost? Of what colour? Of what size? What is the
number of things? Was it dropped or not dropped? If it was dropped, at
which place was it dropped? Whence did you obtain it?

If he gives a correct account of the colour, number and other details;
‘*colour*’ of animals, clothes and the like: ‘the cow or the cloth lost
was white’; similarly the ‘*number*’: ‘there were ten cows or yokes.’
‘Other details’—such as, *e.g*., if it was gold what was its weight, if
it was in a lump or a definite shape. If he gives a correct account of
all this, then he establishes his ownership, and as such ‘*ought to
receive the property*.’

An ‘account’ is called ‘correct,’ when it is found that what it
describes is in exact agreement with what is known by other means of
knowledge.

The mention of ‘colour, number and other details’ is only by way of
illustration, and; implies also the producing of witnesses and other
evidence of ownership.—(31)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 347), which adds the
following notes’—‘*anuyojyaḥ*’ ‘should be questioned’,—‘*rūpam*’, ‘white
and so forth’,—‘*saṅkhyā*,’ ‘four, five &c’,—the term ‘*ādi*’ is meant
to include the ‘kind’ character and such other details regarding lost
property.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 226);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Āhnika, p. 36a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.31-32)  
**

*Agnipurāṇa* (Rājadharma, 222-17-18).—(Same as Manu.)

*Yājñavalkya* (2-33.2173 (?)).—(See under 29 and 30.)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

स्वामित्वकारणाख्याने सति ।
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

031	He who says, 'This belongs to me,' must be examined according to the rule; if he accurately describes the shape, and the number (of the articles found) and so forth, (he is) the owner, (and) ought (to receive) that property.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/032_avedayAno_naShTasya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>032 अवेदयानो नष्टस्य ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अवेदयानो नष्टस्य  
देशं कालं च तत्त्वतः ।  
वर्णं रूपं प्रमाणं च  
तत्समं दण्डम् अर्हति  ॥ ८.३२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/032_avedayAno_naShTasya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If he does not provide a correct account of the place and time, and also the colour, form and size of the lost article, he deserves a fine equal to that article.—(32)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

मिथ्या प्रवर्तमानस्य दण्डो ऽयम् उच्यते । यो न ज्ञापयति **नष्टस्य** धनस्य **देशं कालं** च, अस्मिन् देशे काले वा हारितम्, **तत्त्वतः** परमार्थतह्ṁ **वर्णं** शुक्लादिकम्, **रूपं** पटी शाटकयुगं वेत्यादिकम् आकारम्, **प्रमाणं** पञ्चहस्तायामं सप्तहस्तमात्रं वा, **अवेदयानः,** तदा **तत्समं** यावति द्रव्ये मित्थ्याप्रवृत्तस् तत्तुल्यं **दण्डम् अर्हति** ॥ ८.३२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse lays down the penalty for preferring a false claim.

He who does not provide a ‘correct’—true—account of the time and place
*of the lost article*—that ‘it was lost at such a time and at such a
place’;—‘*colour*’ white and the rest; ‘*form*’—that ‘it was a piece of
cloth, or a pair of petty-coats’ and so forth; ‘*size*’—that^(‘)it was
five cubits or seven cubits in length’;—if he fails to give a correct
account of all this, then he deserves a fine equal to the property to
which he had laid a false claim.—(32)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 347).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.31-32)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.31].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

तत्र शुक्लादिर् वर्णः, आकारो रूपम्, संख्यापलाग्रपरिमाणं प्रमाणम् । नियमेन चात्र तच्छुद्ध्यर्थो दण्डः ॥ ८.३२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

032	But if he does not really know the time and the place (where it was) lost, its colour, shape, and size, he is worthy of a fine equal (in value) to the (object claimed).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/033_AdadItA-tha_ShaDbhAgam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>033 आददीताऽथ षड्भागम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

आददीताऽथ षड्भागं  
प्रनष्टाधिगतान् नृपः ।  
दशमं द्वादशं वापि  
सतां धर्मम् अनुस्मरन्  ॥ ८.३३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/033_AdadItA-tha_ShaDbhAgam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Property that has been lost and found should remain in the charge of specially deputed (officials); and the thieves that he may detect in connection with this, the king shall cause to be killed by an elephant.—(33)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**आददीत** गृह्णीयात् **षष्ठं भागं दशमं द्वादशं वा** प्रनष्टलब्धाद् द्रव्यात् । अवशिष्टं स्वामिने ऽर्पयेत् । तत्र प्रथमे वर्षे द्वादशो भागो द्वितीये दशमस् तृतीये षष्ठ इति । अथ वा रक्षाक्लेशक्षयापेक्षो भागविकल्पः । **सतां धर्मम् अनुस्मरन्** शिषानाम् एष समाचार इति जानानः ॥ ८.३३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Pranaṣṭādhigatan*’— that which has been lost and then found, *i.e*.,
at first lost and subsequently found.

‘*Should remain in charge of officials specially deputed*’—whose chief
duty is to take care of the property.

While it is thus kept, if thieves should happen to steal it,—then these
thieves the King shall cause to be killed by an elephant.

The specification of the ‘elephant’ can only he with a view to some
invisible (transcendental) result.—(33)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Which particular part of the property is to be taken by the king in any
particular case shall depend upon the length of time for which it has
been kept by the king (Medhātithi and Rāghavānanda),—or on the trouble
involved in keeping it (Medhātithi and Govindarāja),—or on the character
of the owner (Kullūka and Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.33), which concludes that
dining the first year, the king should hand over to the owner the entire
property, keeping nothing for the state,—during the second year he
should keep for the state the twelfth part of it,—during the third year,
its tenth part,—and during the fourth year and onwards, the sixth part;
and in every case the fourth part of the royal share should be given to
the man who found the property.—This is again quoted in the same work
under 2.173, where also the same explanation is accepted.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 778), which declares that whether the
king shall take the larger or smaller share shall depend upon the
trouble involved in the keeping of the property.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 87), which accepts the
explanation given in the *Mitākṣarā*, and adds that the rule that the
king should take the whole property after the lapse of three years is
meant for those cases where the owner of the property is not known; but
in cases where it is known that such and such an article has been
forgotten here by this or that man,—the property has to be handed over
to him, even though he may turn up after the lapse of three years.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 347), which adds the following
notes;—‘*Praṇaṣṭādhigatāt*’ means ‘out of the property that was lost,
discovered *and kept in custody*;’—the alternatives regarding the
portion to be taken by the king are based upon the amount of trouble
involved in the keeping of the property;—this rule is meant for the case
of property other than the ‘single-hoofed’ and the rest mentioned in
Yājñavalkya (2.174).

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 226);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Rājanīti, p. 265), which adds the following notes:—‘*Praṇaṣṭa*’ means
‘fallen away from the possession of the owner—if some such property has
been found by the customs-officer or other officers guarding the place,
and brought over to the king,—then out of that, if the owner should turn
up to claim it during the first year, the king should hand over to him
the whole of it,—if during the second year, he should keep for the state
the twelfth part of it,—during the third year, the tenth part, and
during the fourth year and onwards, the sixth part, adding that the
increased share is justified by the increased trouble involved in
keeping the property for a longer period.

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 27b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.33-34)**

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 96).—‘In the case of the loss of property in the shape
of a biped, the owner shall pay five *Paṇas* as the fee; in that of
one-hoofed animals, 4 *Paṇas*; in the case of cows and buffaloes, 2
*Paṇas*; in that of small cattle, one fourth of a *Paṇa*; in the case of
gems and minor metals, five per cent, of the value.’

*Gautama* (10.36-38).—(See under 30.)

*Yājñavalkya* (2.174).—‘The owner should give to the Under 4 *Paṇas* in
the case of a one-hoofed animal, 5 in the ease of man, two in the ease
of buffaloes, camels and cows, and a fourth *Paṇa* in the case of sheep
or goat.’

*Nārada* (Vivādaratnākara).—‘If a man recovers his own property that had
been lost, he shall report it to the King; and he shall take it only
after he has proved his honesty.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ऊर्ध्वम् एव त्र्यब्दाद् अधिगतस्वामिकम्, न तु सर्वं प्रत्यर्पयेत् । किं तर्हि उद्धृतषड्भागादिभागं प्रत्यर्पयेत् । षड्भागादिग्रहणव्यवस्था च गुणापेक्षया संरक्षणश्रमव्यपेक्षया च नियम्यते ॥ ८.३३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

033	Now the king, remembering the duty of good men, may take one-sixth part of property lost and afterwards found, or one-tenth, or at least one-twelfth.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/034_pranaShTAdhigatan_dravyam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>034 प्रनष्टाधिगतन् द्रव्यम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

प्रनष्टाधिगतं द्रव्यं  
तिष्ठेद् युक्तैर् अधिष्ठितम् ।  
यांस् तत्र चौरान् गृह्णीयात्  
तान् राजेभेन घातयेत्  ॥ ८.३४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/034_pranaShTAdhigatan_dravyam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Out of the property that has been lost and found, the king, remembering the duty of good men, shall take the sixth part, or the tenth, or the twelfth.—(34)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

प्रनष्टम् अधिगतं **प्रनष्टाधिगतं** पूर्वं प्रनष्टं पश्चाद् अधिगतम् । **अधिष्ठितं** **युक्तैस्** तत्परैर् आरक्षपुरुषैस् **तिष्ठेत्** । तथास्थितम् अपि यदि केचन **चौरा**[^१३३] **गृह्णीयुस्** **तान् राजा इभेन** हस्तिना **घातयेत्** । हस्तिग्रहणम्[^१३४] अदृष्टार्थम्[^१३५] ॥ ८.३४ ॥


[^१३५]:
     M G: dṛṣṭārtham


[^१३४]:
     M G add: tarhi


[^१३३]:
     M G DK (1: 1955): corā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Shall take*’—sieze—either the sixth or the tenth or the twelfth
part—of the property lost and found, and make over the remainder to the
owner. During the first year, he shall take the twelfth part, during the
second year, the tenth part, and during the third year, the sixth part.
Or, the option regarding the share may be based upon the amount of
trouble entailed in taking care of the property.

‘*Remembering the duty of good men*,’—*i.e*., knowing that such is the
practice among cultured people.—(34)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 347), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Praṇaṣṭādhigatam*’, ‘was first lost and then
recovered’;—‘*yuktaiḥ*’, ‘carefully devoted to guarding the
property—‘*ibhena*’, ‘by means of an elephant’;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi*
(p. 149). which notes that the ‘guarding’ is to be done by the king’s
officers, and explains ‘*ibhena*’ as ‘by an elephant’.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.33-34)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.33].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अस्वामिकत्वाद् अस्य प्रयत्नेन रक्षणार्थम् इदम् उच्यते । युक्तानां च रक्षिणां हस्तिवधो दृष्टप्रयोजनः ॥ ८.३४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

034	Property lost and afterwards found (by the king's servants) shall remain in the keeping of (special) officials; those whom the king may convict of stealing it, he shall cause to be slain by an elephant.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/035_mamAyam_iti.md">
<details open><summary><h3>035 ममायम् इति ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ममायम् इति यो ब्रूयान्  
निधिं सत्येन मानवः ।  
तस्याददीत षड्भागं  
राजा द्वादशम् एव वा  ॥ ८.३५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/035_mamAyam_iti.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In regard to a treasure-trove, if a man says truly ‘this is mine,’—from him the king shall take the sixth part, or only the twelfth part.—(35)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

निखातायाम् भूमौ गुप्तं स्थापितं धनं **निधिर्** उच्यते । वर्षशतिका वर्षसहस्रिकाश् च निधयो भवन्ति । तत्र यदि भूमेर् विदार्यमाणायाः कथंचित् केनचिन् निधिर् आसाद्यते, स तु राजधनम् । तथा च गौतमः- "निध्यधिगमो राजधनम्" (ग्ध् १०.४३) इति । एतच् चास्मर्यमाणनिधातृके निधौ द्रष्टव्यम् । तस्याख्याता षष्ठं लबेतेत्य् उक्तम् । अयं तु श्लोको यत्राख्यातैव निधाता तत्पुरुषो वा पितृपितामहादिश् तद्विषयो द्रष्टव्यः । **ममायं निधिर् इति यो ब्रूयात् सत्येन** प्रमाणेन ज्ञापयेद् इत्य् अर्थः । **तस्याददीत षड्भागम्** इति । निश्चिते तत्स्वामिकत्वे राज्ञः षष्ठादिभागग्रहणम् । विकल्पश् चाख्यातृगुणापेक्षया ॥ ८.३५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Treasure secretly buried under the ground is called ‘*nidhi*,’
‘*treasure-trove*.’ There are treasure-troves that have lain under the
ground for a hundred, or even a thousand years. If, when the ground is
being dug, such a treasure-trove is somehow found by some one, it
belongs to the state. As says Gautama (10.43)—‘Treasure-trove when found
is state-property.’ But this applies only to the case of a
treasure-trove the original hoarder of which is not known. And with
regard to this it has been laid down that one who reports the find is to
receive the sixth part of it.

The present verse refers to the case where the original hoarder is
either the person reporting the find himself or a descendant of his.

‘*If a man says* “*this is mine*” *truly*’—*i.e*., on reliable
evidence,—‘*from him the King shall take the* *sixth part*’—at which the
King’s share is fixed. That is, the King is to take the sixth part out
of that treasure-trove of which the rightful owner has been discovered
with certainty.

The option regarding the ‘sixth’ or ‘twelfth’ part is based upon the
qualities of the finder.—(35)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The amount to be taken depends ‘upon the character of the finder’
(Medhātithi, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda),—or ‘on the caste of the finder’
(Nārāyaṇa),—or, ‘on the time, place, the caste of the finder and so
forth’ (Govindarāja).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 641), which adds that the amount
of the royalty shall be determined in due accordance with the character
(of the claimant, and of the treasure);—in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.34-35),
which notes that the proportion of the royalty is to be determined by
considerations of the caste of the claimant, the nature of the place and
time and such other details;—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 642), which adds
the following notes:—‘*Nidhi*’ here stands for ‘treasure buried
underground long ago and forgotten’,—whether the king shall receive the
sixth or twelfth part shall depend upon the virtuous character or
otherwise of the person claiming it.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 88), which appears to take the
meaning to be that the king shall take the sixth part for the state,
*and also* the twelfth part for the person who discovered the treasure.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 269), which adds that the
exact proportion shall depend upon the time and upon the qualifications
of the owner of the treasure;—and that this refers to treasure belonging
to others than the Brāhmaṇas.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (3.63).—‘Of treasure anciently hidden by themselves, men of all
castes excepting Brāhmaṇas, shall give a twelfth part to the King.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.35).—‘When some one has discovered hidden treasure, the
King shall take the sixth part of it. In cases where the find is not
reported to the King, on coming to know of it, he shall take the whole
of it, and also fine the finder.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.13).—‘If anyone finds treasure, the owner of which is not
known, the King shall take it, giving one-sixth to the finder.’

*Gautama* (10.43-45).—‘Treasure-trove is the property of the
King,—excepting such as is found by a Brāhmaṇa who lives according to
the law. Some people declare that a finder belonging to a
non-Brāhmaṇical caste also, who reports the find to the King, shall
obtain the sixth part of its value.’

*Nārada* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 343).—‘If a man finds treasure hidden by
some one else, he shall take it to the King; all treasure-trove, to
whomsoever it may have belonged, should go to the King; except that
belonging to the Brāhmaṇa.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, pp. 269-270).—‘Having
obtained a treasure-trove, the King shall keep half of it in his
Treasury; and the other half the righteous King shall make over to
Brāhmaṇas.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

राजानाधिगतम् अध्गतं वा यो निधिं प्रवादयेद् आत्मीयं कारणतः तस्य श्रोत्रियत्वाद्यपेक्षया भागविकल्प आश्रयितव्यः प्रतिपत्तिकारणविसंवादे च —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

035	From that man who shall truly say with respect to treasure-trove, 'This belongs to me,' the king may take one-sixth or one-twelfth part.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/036_anRtan_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>036 अनृतन् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अनृतं तु वदन् दण्ड्यः  
स्ववित्तस्याऽंशम् अष्टमम् ।  
तस्यैव वा निधानस्य  
सङ्ख्ययाल्पीयसीं कलाम्  ॥ ८.३६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/036_anRtan_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But he who speaks falsely shall, be fined the eighth part of his property, or a smaller fraction, on calculation, of that same treasure-trove.—(36)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यस् तु मयायं निहितो मत्पूर्वजेन वेति[^१३६] प्रतिज्ञां न साधयति सो ऽसत्यवादी[^१३७] दण्ड्यः । यावत् तस्य वित्तम् अस्ति, ततो ऽष्टमं भागं **तस्यैव वा** **निधानस्याल्पीयसीं कलां** मात्रां भागम् इत्य् अर्थः । न तु तद् एव द्रव्यं सुवर्णादिकं दापयेत्, किं तु तत्परिमाणम् अन्यद् वा सममूल्यं यया धनमात्रया दण्डितो ऽवसादं न[^१३८] गच्छेद् विनयं वा ग्राह्येत । अनुबन्धादिविशेषापेक्षया पुरुषगुणापेक्षया च विकल्प आश्रयणीयः । आतिशायनिकात् पूर्वदण्डात् स्वल्पो दण्ड इति ज्ञापयति । तेन यस्य बहु वित्तं स्वल्पो निधिः, तत्र निध्यपेक्षां मात्राम् अष्टमांशम्[^१३९] अर्थाधीनां दण्ड्यः । सा ह्य् अल्पीयसी भवति ॥ ८.३६ ॥


[^१३९]:
     M G DK: aṣṭamām


[^१३८]:
     M G omit: na


[^१३७]:
     M G: 'nyavādī


[^१३६]:
     M G: ceti
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

But when the man, who has made the statement ‘this treasure was hoarded
by me, or by my forefathers,’ fails to prove this,—then being a liar, he
should be fined the eighth part of what his own property may be,—or a
smaller fraction of that same treasure-trove, it is not necessary that
he should he made to pay in the same metal, gold or otherwise, as that
which has been found; he may pay in some other metal of equal value to
the former; the exact amount of the fine being such as does not ruin the
culprit, and yet teaches him a lesson.

The option is based either upon the peculiarity of the attendant
circumstances of each case, or the qualities of the person concerned.
That this is so is indicated by the fact that the latter punishment is
lighter than the former one, which is excessive. Thus then, where the
man is possessed of a large property, and the treasure concerned is
small, there the fine shall not be in proportion to the latter; in this
case the fine shall be in proportion to the man’s property; the former
would be too little (to be a deterrent).—(36)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The amount of the fine depends on the circumstances of the case and the
virtues of the offender (Medhātithi),—or only on the virtues of the
offender (Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).

The first half of this verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 641);—and the
whole verse in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 642), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Alpīyasīm kalām*’ implies that'the fine is to be imposed in
such a manner that the entire treasure may not become absorbed,—this
being meant for those cases where the exact extent of the
entire-property is not known.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Agnipurāṇa* (Rājadharma, 222.16).—(Same as Manu.)

*Viṣṇu* (3.64).—‘The man, who falsely claims property hidden by another
as having been hidden by himself, shall he condemned to pay a fine equal
in amount to the property falsely claimed by him.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.35).—(See under 31.)

*Nārada* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 642).—‘If a man recovers his own lost
property, he shall report it to the King; and if he makes good his
claim, he shall take it; otherwise he would be suspected.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यथा धनमात्रया दण्डितो ऽवसादं न गच्छेद्, विनयं [च] ग्राह्येत तावतीम् अर्थमात्रां दापयेत् । पुरुषविशेषापेक्षया च दण्डविकल्प आश्रयितव्यः ॥ ८.३६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

036	But he who falsely says (so), shall be fined in one-eighth of his property, or, a calculation of (the value of) the treasure having been made, in some smaller portion (of that).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/037_vidvAMs_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>037 विद्वांस् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

विद्वांस् तु ब्राह्मणो दृष्ट्वा  
पूर्वोपनिहितं निधिम् ।  
अशेषतो ऽप्य् आददीत  
सर्वस्याऽधिपतिर् हि सः  ॥ ८.३७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/037_vidvAMs_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A learned Brāhmaṇa, having found treasure buried by his forefathers, shall take it wholly; as he is the master of everything.—(37)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^१४०]**विद्वान् ब्राह्मणः** पूर्वैः पित्रादिभिर् उपहितं **निधिं** यदा पश्येत् तदा सर्वम् एव्**आददीत**, न राज्ञे पूर्वोक्तं भागं दद्यात् । अस्यार्थवादः- **सर्वस्याधिपतिर् हि सः** । तथा चोक्तम्- "सर्वं स्वं[^१४१] ब्राह्मणस्येदम्" (म्ध् १.१००) इति । एतच् च्**आसेषतो** ग्रहणं यो ब्राह्मणस्वामिक एव निधिः । यस् त्व् अविज्ञातस्वामिकः तस्मिन् विद्वद्ब्राह्मणदृष्टे[^१४२] ऽप्य् अस्त्य् एव राज्ञो भागः । यतो वक्ष्यति "निधीनां तु पुराणानाम्" (म्ध् ८.३९) इति ॥ ८.३७ ॥


[^१४२]:
M G: vijñeyaḥ brāhmaṇadṛṣṭo


[^१४१]:
All read: sarvasvaṃ


[^१४०]:
M G DK (1: 1956; 4: 1342) add at beginning: yadā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When a learned Brāhmaṇa finds the treasure that bad been buried by his
forefathers—father, grandfather and so forth,—then ‘*he shall take it
wholly*,’ and shall not hand over to the king the aforesaid part of it.

In support of this the text adds a supplementary exaggeration—‘*as he*
is *the master of everything*,’—as has been declared under 1.100.

The rule here laid down applies to the case where the treasure belongs
to the Brāhmaṇa; when however its rightful owner is not known, then,
even though it may have boon found by a ‘*learned Brāhmaṇa*,’ the king’s
share has to be paid; as it is going to be declared (in 39) that—‘of all
ancient hoards...... the king is entitled to one-half.’—(37)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Pūrvoyanihitam*’—‘Deposited by ancestors’ (Medhātithi, Govindarāja and
Nārāyaṇa);—‘deposited in former times’ (Kullūka).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (10.43-44).—‘Treasure-trove is the property of the
King;—excepting such as is found by a Brāhmaṇa who lives according to
the Law.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.14).—‘If a Brāhmaṇa following the six lawful
qualifications finds the treasure, the King shall not take it.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.58).—‘A Brāhmaṇa who has found treasure may keep it entire.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.34).—‘The learned Brāhmaṇa shall take the treasure;
since he is the master of all.’

*Nārada* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 643).—‘If a man comes by treasure hidden
by another, he shall present it to the King; as all Treasure-trove is
the property of the King, except what belongs to the Brāhmaṇa. The
Brāhmaṇa also, coming by hidden treasure, shall report it to the King,
and it is only when it is made over to him by the King that he should
enjoy it; if he failed to report the find, he would be a thief.’

*Agnipurāṇa* (222. 14).—‘The Brāhmaṇa finding hidden treasure, shall
take it all to himself.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवं च सति ऽममायम्" इत्य् अस्मिन् पूर्वविधाव् अब्राह्मणविषयं भागस्य विकल्पेन ग्रहणम् । अविद्वद्ब्राह्मणविषयं वा ॥ ८.३७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

037	When a learned Brahmana has found treasure, deposited in former (times), he may take even the whole (of it); for he is master of everything.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/038_yan_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>038 यन् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यं तु पश्येन् निधिं राजा  
पुराणं निहितं क्षितौ ।  
तस्माद् द्विजेभ्यो दत्त्वार्धम्  
अर्धं कोशे प्रवेशयेत्  ॥ ८.३८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/038_yan_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When the king himself finds a hoard buried of old under the ground, he shall give one-half of it to the Brāhmaṇas and have the other half put in his treasury.—(38)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यो राज्ञा स्वयं निधिर् अधिगतस् तस्मान् निधेर् अयं ब्राह्मणेभ्यो दाननियमो राज्ञः । **कोश**शब्देन वित्तसंचयस्थानम् उच्यते । **पुराणं निहितं क्षिताव्** इति निधिरूपानुवादः ॥ ८.३८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When the king himself has found treasure, this text lays down that he
shall give one-half of it to the *Brāhmaṇas*.

The term ‘*Treasury’ stands* for the place of hoarding.

‘*Buried* *of old under* *the* *ground*’;—this describes the nature of
the treasure-trove.—(38)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (10.43).—(See under 37.)

*Viṣṇu* (3.56-57).—‘Of a Treasure-trove he must give one half to the
Brāhmaṇas;—he may deposit the other half in his Treasury.’

*Yajñavalkya* (2.34).—‘Having found a Treasure-trove, the King shall
give half of it to Brāhmaṇas;—the learned Brāhmaṇa however, may take the
whole of what he finds; since he is the master of all.’

*Agnipurāṇa* (222.14).—‘The King shall deposit half of it in the
Treasury and give the other half to Brāhmaṇas; the good Brāhmaṇa however
takes the whole of the hidden treasure that he has found.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

राज्ञो ऽयं निध्यधिगमे दाननियमः । न त्व् अन्यस्य, वचनसामर्थ्यात् ॥ ८.३८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

038	When the king finds treasure of old concealed in the ground let him give one half to Brahmanas and place the (other) half in his treasury.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/039_nidhInAn_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>039 निधीनान् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

निधीनां तु पुराणानां  
धातूनाम् एव च क्षितौ ।  
अर्धभाग् रक्षणाद् राजा  
भूमेर् अधिपतिर् हि सः  ॥ ८.३९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/039_nidhInAn_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Of ancient hoards, as also of minerals under the ground, the king is entitled to his share, by reason of his protecting them,—he being the lord of the soil.—(39)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अन्येनापि दृष्टस्य निधे राज्ञा भागः पूर्वोक्तो ग्रहीतव्य इत्य् अस्य विधेर् अर्थवादो ऽयम्- **निधीनां** हि **पुराणानाम्** इति । **धातूनाम् एव च क्षितौ-** अयं त्व् अप्राप्तविधिः । सुवर्णरूप्यादिबीजम्[^१४३] मृदः सिन्दूरकालाञ्जनाद्याश् च धातवः । सुवर्णाद्याकरभूमीर् यः खनति, यो वा पर्वतादिषु गैरिकादिधातून् उपजीवति, तेनापि पूर्ववद् राज्ञे भागो दातव्यः । **अर्धभाग्** इति अर्धशब्दो ऽंशमात्रवचनः समासनिर्देशात्, यथा ग्रामार्धो नगरार्धम् इति । नपुंसकलिङ्गस् तु समप्रविभागः । इह तु समासे लिङ्गविशेषप्रतिपत्त्यभावात् पूर्वस्य[^१४४] **च**शब्दवशात्[^१४५] षड्दशद्वादशादेर् भागस्य प्रकृतत्वात् तद्वचनो विज्ञायते । अर्धं भजत एकदेशं गृह्णातीत्य् अर्थः । अत्र हेतुः, **रक्षणाद्** इति । यद्य् अपि क्षितौ निहितस्य केनचिद् अज्ञानान् न राजकीयरक्षोपयुज्यते, तथापि तस्य बलवतापहारः संभाव्यते । अतो ऽस्त्य् एव रक्षाया अर्थवत्त्वम् । एतदर्थम् एवाह- **भूमेर् अधिपतिर् हि सः** । प्रभुर् असौ भूमेः । तदीयायाश् च भुवो यल् लब्धं तत्र युक्तं तस्य भागदानम् ॥ ८.३९ ॥


[^१४५]:
     J DK (4: 1343 – but not 1.1957) omit: caśabdavaśāt


[^१४४]:
     J: pūrvavat 


[^१४३]:
     J omits: bījam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The clause—‘*of ancient hoards, etc*’— is supplementary to the
before-mentioned rule that the king should take one-half of the treasure
even when it is found by other persons;—while the clause ‘*of minerals
under the ground*’ lays down what has not been mentioned before. Gold,
silver and other metals in their crude form, as also red lead, black
collyrium and other substances (in their crude form) are what are called
‘*minerals*.’ So that the man who operates golden and other mines, as
also one who makes his living by digging out red chalk and such
substances from mountains, has to pay the king’s share.

‘*Ardhabhāk*,’ ‘*is entitled to a share*’—The term ‘*ardha*’ here should
be taken as standing for *share or part* in general; because it occurs
in a compound; just as in the compounds ‘*nagarārdha*’ and ‘*grāmārdha*’
(which mean *part* of the city, *part* of the village); it is only when
it is used in the neuter form that it means exactly *half*; in the
present instance however, as it occurs in a compound and its gender is
not ascertainable, it has to be taken as standing for the *sixth or
twelfth part*, which has been spoken of in the present context. ‘*He is
entitled to his share*’;—this means that he takes a part of it.

The reason for this is stated—‘*on account of his protecting
them*’—Though when the treasure is buried under the ground, there is no
need for any royal protection, yet it is open to the risk of being taken
away by some powerful person; so that there is need for the king’s care.
It is with a view to this that it has been added—‘*he being the lord of
the soil*’;—he is the master of the soil, so that when something has
been obtained out of the soil that belongs to him, it is only right that
he should receive his share out of it.—(39).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 267), which adds
that this verse is supplementary to 38, and notes that the second half,
which the king should deposit in his treasury (in terms of verse 38), is
to be so kept with the clear purpose of handing it over to the rightful
claimant when he turns up.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (10.43-45).—‘Treasure-trove is the property of the
King,—except that which is found by a Brāhmaṇa living according to
Law;—some declare that a non-Brahmaṇa also finding hidden treasure and
reporting it to the King, shall receive one-sixth of its value.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.13).—‘If any one finds treasure, the owner whereof is not
known, the King shall take it, giving one-sixth to the finder.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.58-62).—‘A Brāhmaṇa finding treasure shall keep it entire; a
Kṣatriya finding treasure must give one-fourth of it to the King,
another fourth to Brāhmaṇas and keep half to himself; a Vaiśya finding
treasure must give a fourth part to the King, one-half to Brāhmaṇas and
keep the remainder to himself. A Śūdra finding treasure should divide it
into twelve parts and give five parts to the King, five to Brāhmaṇas and
keep two parts to himself. Let the King compel him who having found
treasure does not report it to the King and is found out afterwards—to
give up the whole.’

*Y ājñavalkya* (2.35).—‘If some one else finds a treasure, the King
shall take the sixth part of it; if he has not reported it to the King
and is found out, he should be compelled to deliver the treasure and
also pay a line.’

*Agnipurāṇa* (222.14).—(See under 38.)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**अर्धभाग्** अंशभाक्, अर्धशब्दो ह्य् अंशे ऽपि दृश्यते । "अर्धिकः कुलमित्रश् च" इति । एवं च सत्य् अंशप्र्कॢप्तिर् द्रष्टृगुणापेक्षया राजाभिप्रायेण वा कल्पयितव्या । तथा च समप्रविभागार्थो ऽप्य् अर्धशब्दः ॥ ८.३९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

039	The king obtains one half of ancient hoards and metals (found) in the ground, by reason of (his giving) protection, (and) because he is the lord of the soil.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/040_dAtavyaM_sarvavarNebhyo.md">
<details open><summary><h3>040 दातव्यं सर्ववर्णेभ्यो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

दातव्यं सर्ववर्णेभ्यो  
राज्ञा चौरैर् हृतं धनम् ।  
राजा तद् उपयुञ्जानश्  
चौरस्याप्नोति किल्बिषम्  ॥ ८.४० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/040_dAtavyaM_sarvavarNebhyo.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Property stolen by thieves should be restored by the king to men of all castes; by retaining such property, the king imbibes the sin of the thief.—(40)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**चौरैर्** यन् नीतं किंचिद् **धनं** तद् राजा प्रत्याहृत्य नात्मन्य् उपयुञ्जीत । किं तर्हि, य एव मुषितास् तेभ्य एव प्रतिपादयितव्यम् । **सर्व**ग्रहणेन च चण्डालेभ्यो ऽपि देयम् इति । "चौराहृतम्" इत्य् अन्यस्मिन् पाठे चौरैः आहृतम्[^१४६] इति विगृह्य साधनं "कृता" (पाण् २.१.३२) इति समासः । पाठान्तरे "चौरहृतम्" इति "तृतीया" (पाण् २.१.३०) इति योगविभागात् पूर्ववद् वा समासः । अयं त्व् अत्रार्थः- यच् चौरैर् हृतम् अशक्यप्रत्यानयनं तद् राज्ञा स्वकोशाद् दातव्यम् ।


[^१४६]:
     M G DK (1: 1957): samāhṛtam; but DK (4: 704) has āhṛtam

उत्तरश्लोकार्ध[^१४७] एवं योजनीयः- **राजा तद् उपयुञ्जान** इति । अनेकार्थत्वाद् धातूनाम् उपपूर्वो युजिर् लक्षणया वाप्रतिपादन[^१४८] एव द्रष्टव्यः । यो ह्य् अन्यस्मै प्राप्तकालं धनं न ददाति, स्वप्रयोजनेषु विनियुङ्क्ते, तेन तदीयम् एव तदुपयुक्तं भवतीति युक्तम् उच्यते- **राजा** **तद् उपयुञ्जानश्** **चौरस्याप्नोति किल्बिषम्** । किल्बिषं[^१४९] पापम् ॥ ८.४० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When any property is stolen by thieves, the king should recover it; but
he should not use it himself; he should restore it to the persons that
may have been robbed.

The use of the term ‘*all*’ implies that stolen property shall be
restored to Caṇḍālas also.

If we read ‘*caurāhṛtam*’ (in place of ‘*chaurairhṛtam*’), the compound
should be expounded as ‘*chaurebhyaḥ āhṛtam*’—*i.e*., *recovered from
thieves*—in accordance with Pāṇini 2.1.32. If we adopt the (third)
reading ‘*chaurahṛtam*,’ the compounding would be in accordance with
Pāṇini 2.1.30.

What is meant is that if the property stolen by thieves is incapable of
being recovered, it should be made good by the king out of his own
treasury.

The second half of the verse—‘*By making use*, etc.’—should be construed
as follows:—The participle ‘*upayuñjānaḥ*’—derived from the root
‘*yuja*’ with the preposition ‘*upa*’—should be taken to indicate
figuratively *non-restoration*; the sense being that ‘if the king does
not restore to the person concerned the property that is his due, and if
he uses that property for his own purposes’, then it is said to be
‘retained’ by him; and ‘*by retaining such property the king imbibes the
sin of the thief*,’—‘*kilviṣa*’ meaning *sin*.—(40)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.36), which adds:—(a) If the
king recovers the stolen property from the thieves and keeps it for
himself, he takes the sin of the thief, (b) if he ignores the theft,
then the sins of the people fall upon him; (c) if, having tried his best
to recover the stolen property, he fails to do so, he should make good
the loss out of his own treasury.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautuma* (10.46-47).—‘Having recovered property stolen by thieves, he
shall return it to the owner;—or he shall pay its value out of his own
treasury.’

*Āpastamba* (2.26.8) (2.268?).—‘The King’s officers should ho made to
repay what is stolen within the boundaries of their charge.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.66-67).—‘Having recovered the goods stolen by thieves, let
him restore them entire to their owners, to whatever caste they may
belong. If he is unable to recover them, he must pay their value out of
his own treasury.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.36).—‘The King should give to the people, what has been
stolen by thieves; if he does not give it, he incurs the sin of
stealing.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 641).—‘If the King is unable to recover what has
been stolen by thieves, he shall make it good out of his own treasury.’

*Nārada* (6.16 *et seq*.).—‘He on whose land robbery has been committed
must trace the thieves to the best of his power; or else, he must make
good what has been stolen, unless the footmarks can be traced from that
ground into another man’s ground. When the footmarks, after leaving that
ground, are lost and cannot be traced any further, the neighbours,
inspectors of the road and governors of that region shall be made
responsible for the loss. When a house has been plundered, the King
shall cause the thief-catchers, the guards and the inhabitants of that
region to make good the loss, if the thief is not caught.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अस्मिन् पाठे राज्ञानीतस्वद्रव्यः पोषयितव्यश् चोरैर् अपहृतस्याशक्यादाने । चोराहृतम् इति पाठे तु अयम् अर्थः- चोरेभ्य आहृत्य राजा न भागं तस्मात् कंचिद् उपाद[द्यात् किं तु स्व]स्थानं प्रतिपादयेत् । एवं च धर्मयशसी तेनापरित्यक्ते भवतः ॥ ८.४० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

040	Property stolen by thieves must be restored by the king to (men of) all castes (varna); a king who uses such (property) for himself incurs the guilt of a thief.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/041_jAti-jAnapadAn_dharmAn.md">
<details open><summary><h3>041 जाति-जानपदान् धर्मान् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

जाति-जानपदान् धर्मान्  
श्रेणीधर्मांश् च धर्मवित् ।  
समीक्ष्य कुलधर्मांश् च  
स्वधर्मं प्रतिपादयेत्  ॥ ८.४१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/041_jAti-jAnapadAn_dharmAn.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king knowing his duty shall determine the law for each man, after haying duly examined the provincial laws pertaining to each caste, the law’s of guilds, as also the laws of families.—(11)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कुरुकापिशकाश्मीरादिदेशो नियतावधिः जनपदम् । तत्र भवा धर्मा **जानपदाः** । केचित्[^१५०] तत्र भवन्ति ये तद्देशव्यपदेशैर् अनुष्ठीयन्ते । अथ वा तन्निवासिनो जना मञ्चाः क्रोशन्तीतिवत् जनपदशब्देनाभिधीयन्ते । तेषाम् अनुष्ठेया जानपदाः । "तस्येदम्" (पाण् ४.३.१२९) इति तद्धितः । जातेर् जानपदा **जातिजानपदा** इति षष्ठीसमासः । जातिमात्रविषया देशधर्मा राज्ञा परिपालनीयाः । **समीक्ष्य** विचार्य — किम् आम्नायैर् विरुद्धा अथ न, तथा पीडाकराः कस्यचिद् उत न — एवं विचार्य, ये ऽविरुद्धाश् तान् **प्रतिपादयेद्** अनुष्टापयेद् इत्य् अर्थः । तथा च वक्ष्यति "सद्भिर् आचरितं यत् स्यात्" (म्ध् ८.४६) इति । 


[^१५०]:
     M G DK (1: 76): kiṃ ca

- अथ वा जातयश् च ते जानपदाश् चेति विशेषणसमासः । जातिशब्देन च नित्यत्वं लक्ष्यते । प्रशंसामात्रं चैतत् देशधर्माणाम् । यथा जातिर् नित्या एवं[^१५१] देशधर्मा अपि शास्त्राविरुद्धा नित्याः । ते नित्यवद् अनुष्ठेया दृष्टार्था[^१५२] गोप्रचारोदकक्षरणादयः । यथा ग्रामीणा अत्र प्रदेशे गावो न चारणीया इति समयम् आश्रयन्ति कस्यचित् कार्यस्य सिद्ध्यर्थं तत्र यो व्यतिक्रामति स राज्ञा दण्ड्यः । 


[^१५२]:
     M G: dṛṣṭārtho


[^१५१]:
     M G DK omit: deśadharmāṇām | yathā jātir nityā evaṃ

- अथ वा जनपदे भवा **जानपदा** देशनिवासिन उच्यन्ते । जात्या जानपदा **जातिजानपदाः** । जातिर् जन्मोत्पत्तिर् इति यावत् । एतेन देशसंबन्धस्य[^१५३] पुरुषाणां नित्यता लक्ष्यते । ये तद्देशजास् तद्देशाभिजनास् तन्निवासिनश् च गृह्यन्ते, तेषां सर्वविशेषणविशिष्टानाम्[^१५४] अनिदंप्रथमतो जाता ये धर्मास् ते जातिजानपादशब्देनोच्यन्ते । "वृद्धाच् छः" (पाण् ४.२.११४) इति तद्धिते प्रसक्ते छान्दसत्वाद् अणेव कृतः । 


[^१५४]:
     M G: -viśeṣaṇāviśiṣṭānām


[^१५३]:
     M G: deśabandhasya

- अथ वाभेदोपचारात् पुरुषशब्दस् तत्संबन्धिषु धर्मेषु प्रयुक्तः । तेनायं[^१५५] देशनियमो धर्माणां स एवंविधात् पुरुषात् प्रतिद्रष्टव्यः । एते हि देशधर्मा म्लेच्छानां[^१५६] न पुनर् आर्याणाम् । ते[^१५७] हि तिर्यक्समानधर्माणो ऽन्यत्रानधिकृताः स्वसमाचारप्रसिद्धं धर्मम् अनुतिष्ठन्ति मातृविवाहादि[^१५८] । सो ऽयं[^१५९] सार्वभौमेन न[^१६०] निवारणीयः । स्वदेशाचारवतां तेषां जातिधर्मो ऽयं[^१६१] जनपदनिवासबन्धेनाभ्यनुज्ञानात्,[^१६२] आम्नायविरोधो[^१६३] ऽप्य् अत्र नास्ति । अधिकृतानां विरोधात् विरोधो न तिरश्चाम् ।


[^१६३]:
     M G DK: āmnāye virodho


[^१६२]:
     M G DK: jananivāsa-


[^१६१]:
     M G DK omit: so 'yaṃ


[^१६०]:
     M G DK omit: na


[^१५९]:
     M G DK omit: so 'yaṃ


[^१५८]:
     M G: -vivāhādiḥ


[^१५७]:
     M G DK: na


[^१५६]:
     M G DK: deśānāṃ


[^१५५]:
     M G DK: etenāyaṃ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु "अहिंसा सत्यम् अक्रोधः शौचम् इन्द्रियसंयमः" (म्ध् १०.६३) इति प्रतिलोमाधिकारेणैवोक्तम् । म्लेच्छाश् च प्रतिलोमा[^१६४] एव । तत्र यदि मातृविवाहे मूत्रोत्सर्गे चोदकशुद्ध्यभावे न दुष्यति, क इन्द्रियसंयमः कीदृशं वा शौचम् इति । 


[^१६४]:
     M G DK: cāpratilomā

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;उक्तम् एतत् । आर्यावर्तमध्यवर्तिनाम्[^१६५] एते धर्माः शौचादयः । चातुर्वर्ण्ये तु तत्तद्देशनियमो[^१६६] धर्माणां नास्ति । केचिद् अदृष्टार्था देशधर्मा इति वक्ष्यामः । 


[^१६६]:
     M G DK: taddeśaniyamo


[^१६५]:
     M G DK: āryāvartinām

एककार्यापन्ना वणिक्कारुकुसीदिचातुरिकादयः[^१६७] । तेषां धर्माः **श्रेणीधर्माः** । यथा केचन वणिङ्महत्तरा वचनेन परिच्छिन्नं राज्ञो भागं प्रयच्छन्ति — "इमां वणिज्यां वयम् उपजीवाम एष ते राजभागो ऽस्माकं यावल् लाभो ऽस्तु न्यूनो ऽधिको वा" । तत्र राज्ञाभ्युपगते वणिज्ये लाभातिशयार्थं राष्ट्रविरोधिनीं चेतरेतरव्यवस्थां कुर्वन्ति — इदं द्रव्यम् इयन्तं कालम् अविक्रेयम्, अयं राज्ञो ऽपदेशेनार्थो[^१६८] दण्डः पतति, देवतोत्सवार्थो वा । तत्र यदि कश्चिद् व्यतिक्रामति स एवं श्रेणीधर्मव्यतिक्रामन् दण्ड्यः ।  

**कुलधर्मा** इति । कुलं वंशः । तत्र प्रख्यातमहिम्ना पूर्वजेन धर्मः प्रवर्तितो भवति यो ऽस्मद्वंशजः कुतश्चन धनं लभेत स नादत्वा ब्राह्मणेभ्यो ऽन्यत्र विनियुञ्जीतेत्यादयो धर्माः । तथा, सति योग्यत्वे य एव पूर्वपुरुषाणां याजकाः कन्यादिसंप्रदानभूता वा त एव कार्याः[^१६९] । तदतिक्रामन् राज्ञो ऽनुष्ठापयितव्यः । एतेषां च सामवायिकत्वाद् अधर्मत्वशङ्कया पुनर्वचनम् । न चायं संविद्व्यतिक्रम इति वक्ष्यामः ॥ ८.४१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Kuru, Kāśī, Kaśmīra and other regions with fixed boundaries are called
‘provinces,’ and laws obtaining in those are called ‘*provincial*’; by
which are meant those laws that are observed by the people living in the
province and called after it. Or, the term ‘province’ may stand for the
inhabitants of the provinces, just as the men on the platform are called
the ‘platform,’ when it is said that ‘the platforms are crying’; and the
laws observed by these people would, in that case, he called
‘*provincial*’;—the nominal affix ‘aṇ’ being added in accordance with
Pāṇini 4.3.120.

The compound ‘*Jātijānapadāḥ* is to be compounded as
‘*jāteḥ-jānapadāh*’; the meaning being ‘those provincial laws that
pertain to each caste’; and these have to be maintained by the king.

‘*Having examined*,’—*i.e*., duly considered the following points—(*a*)
are these law’s contrary to the scriptures or not? (*b*) are they the
source of trouble to some people or not?

After having duly considered all this, he shall ‘*determine*’—cause to
be observed—those laws that are found, on examination, to be not
incompatible (with the scriptures or with the people’s convenience); as
it is going to be declared later on (verse 46)—‘What may have been
practised by the good, etc., etc.’

Or, the compound ‘*Jātijānapadāḥ*’ may be expounded in such a manner as
to make ‘*jāti*’ the qualification of ‘*janapada*’; the term ‘*jāti*’ in
this case would indicate *eternality*, and would be only a laudatory
epithet to ‘provincial laws’; the idea being that ‘just as genus is
something eternal, so are the provincial laws also, in so far as they
are not contrary to the scriptures’; all such visibly useful acts as the
feeding of cattle, the storing of water in reservoirs and so forth being
such as ought to be performed at all times.

Thus the meaning is that when the men of a certain village have laid
down the rule that ‘cattle should not be taken to graze at such and such
places,’ then if some one, for some purpose of his own, breaks this
rule,—he shall be punished by the king.

Or, the term ‘*jānapada*’ may stand for *those born in the province*;
*i.e*., the inhabitants of the province; and the compound
‘*jātijānapadāḥ*’ being expounded as ‘*jātyā jānapadāḥ*,’ and ‘*jāti*’
standing fot *birth*,—it would signify the eternal relationship between
the *province* and the men *born* there; and the term ‘*jātijānapadāḥ
dharmāḥ*’ would stand for *those laws whose beginning cannot be traced,
and which relate to the duly qualified persons among those born and
living in a particular province*. And though in this case the proper
nominal affix to use would have been ‘*cha*’ (giving the form
*jānapadīya*), according to Pāṇini 5.2.114, yet it is the ‘*aṇ*’-affix
that has been used; this anomaly being permissible as a ‘Vedic anomaly.’

Or, it may be that the term ‘*jātijānapadāḥ*’ though directly denoting
the *inhabitants*, has been applied here to their *laws*,—the two being
regarded as identical; so that the phrase serves to restrict the scope
of the law referred to,—this restriction being deduced from the men
themselves; the sense thus is that the laws referred to pertain only to
the men of certain localities, and not to all the *Ārgas*,—the former
being such as have a morality akin to that of the lower animals, and not
entitled to the performance of any other duties, they perform only such
acts as are in keeping with their own customs; such, for instance, as
the marrying of their own mother and so forth;—and as such in the
performance of such acts, these men shall not be prevented by the king
having his sway over the whole world (thence also over the barbarians);
because such practices ane permitted by their ‘tribal custom,’
sanctioned by the geographical position oi the locality inhabited by
them. Nor could such practices he regarded as ‘contrary to the
scriptures’; because the *incompatibility* *of scriptures* has a meaning
only for persons entitled to the scriptural acts, and not to lower
beings.

An objection is raised—“In Manu (10.63), such duties as *h*
*armlessness, truthfulness*, *absence of anger*, *purity* and *control
of the senses* have been laid down in reference to the irregularly mixed
castes; and *barbarians* also belong to the same category as those
castes; so that if such men would not he committing something wrong in
marrying their mother, or in not using water after urinating, what sort
of ‘control of the senses’ or ‘purity’ would there be for them?”

This has been already answered. Purity and other duties pertain to the
inhabitants of the whole of Āryāvarta; and so far as the four castes are
concerned, there is no restriction of place regarding the duties
pertaining to them.

Some people have held that the restriction as to the locality of the
‘laws’ pertains to some transcendental results;—as we shall point out
later on.

There are people following a common profession; such, as tradesmen,
artisans, money-lenders, coach-drivers and so forth; and the laws
governing these are ‘guild-laws.’ *E.g*., certain principal tradesmen
offer to the king his royal tax fixed upon verbally by their declaring
before the king—‘we are living by this trade, let the tax thereupon be
fixed at such and such a rate, be our profits more or less’; now on the
king agreeing to this, they join together and lay down certain rates
among themselves, which are calculated to bring thorn larger profits and
likely to be detrimental to the interests of the kingdom,—*e.g*., (*a*)
‘Such and such a commodity should not be sold during such and such a
time,’ (*a*) ‘such and such is to be the tax payable either to the king
or towards the celebration of some religious festival,’ and so forth.
And if any one transgresses such rules, he shall be punished for acting
against ‘guild-laws.’

‘*Laws of families*’;—‘Family’ means *race*; some remote ancestor of
well-known fame may have laid down the rule—‘whenever any of my
descendants earns wealth, he shall not make use of it without having
first given something out of it to Brāhmaṇas’;—and such rules are what
are meant by ‘laws of families’; or such rules as ‘priests and
bridegrooms shall be selected out of those same families out of which
they have been selected by one’s forefathers, provided that suitable men
are available therefrom.’ One who acts against such laws shall be
punished by the king.

These have been reiterated here with a view to preclude the idea that
such laws govern only particular groups of men and as such cannot he
regarded as ‘Equity’ proper.

The transgression of these laws does not fall within the category of
‘Breach of Contract,’ as we shall show later on.—(41).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Jānapada*’—‘Of districts’ (Medhātithi, and Kullūka Govindarāja);—‘of
the inhabitants of one and the same village’ (Nārāyaṇa).

The customs here referred to are those that are not repugnant to the
Scriptures (Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 65), which has
the following notes:—‘*Śreṇi-dharma*’ customs established among such
communities as those of the tradesmen and artisans, *e*.*g*., ‘such and
such things are not to be sold on such a day’,—‘*Kuladharma*;’ *e.g*.,
‘in this family the piercing of the ears is to be done in the fifth
year’in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (p. 6b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p.
9b), which has the following notes:—‘*Jātijānapada*’, laws relating to
tribes, castes and to localities,—‘*Śreṇī*’ stands for the corporation
of persons belonging to the same profession,—‘*Svadharma*’, the law
promulgated by the king himself.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (11.10, 11, 20, 21).—‘Those who leave the path of duty, he
shall lead back to it;—for it is declared that he obtains a share of the
spiritual merit gained by his subjects. The laws of countries, castes
and families, which are not opposed to the scriptures, also have
authority. Cultivators, traders, herdsmen, money-lenders and artisans
have authority to lay down regulations for their respective classes.’

*Āpastamba* (2.15.1).—‘The above considerations dispose also of the law
of custom which is observed in countries or families.’

*Bodhāyana* (1.2.1-8).—‘There is a difference of opinion regarding live
practices in the South and in the North. He who follows those practices
in any other country than where they prevail, commits sin; for each of
those practices, the custom of the country should he the authority.
Gautama declares that this is wrong; and one should not take heed of any
of these practices, because they are opposed to the traditions of the
cultured.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1.17).—‘Manu has declared that the peculiar laws of
countries, castes, and families may he followed in the absence of
revealed texts.’

Do. (19.7).—‘Let the King, paying attention to all the laws of
countries, castes and families, make the four castes fulfil their
particular duties.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.3).—‘To keep the four castes and the four orders firm in the
practice of their several duties.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.360).—‘Families, castes, guilds, corporations and the
provinces,—when those deviate from the paths of their duty, the King
should check them and bring them round to the right path.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.89-91)—‘The King should perform his duty by carefully
studying the customs that are followed in countries and are mentioned in
the scriptures, as well as those that are practised by castes, villages,
corporations and families. Those customs that have been introduced in
the country, caste or race should be maintained in the same condition;
for otherwise the people get perplexed.’

*Nārada* (1.7).—‘Families, guilds, corporations, one appointed by the
King and the King himself are invested with the power to decide
law-suits,—each succeeding one being superior to the one preceding in
order.’

*Bṛhaspati* (1.26-30).—‘Cultivators, artisans, artists, money-lenders,
persons belonging to particular religious sects and robbers should
adjust their disputes according to the rules of their own profession.
The King shall cause the disputes of ascetics and of persons versed in
sorcery and witchcraft to be settled by persons familiar with the three
Vedas, and not decide them himself, for fear of rousing their
resentment. Relatives, companies of artisans, assemblies, and other
persons duly authorised by the King should decide law-suits among men,
excepting causes concerning violent crimes; Meetings of Kindred,
companies of artisans, assemblies and chief judges are declared to he
the resorts for the passing of sentences,—to whom he whose cause has
been previously tried may appeal in succession.’

*Bṛhaspati* (2.26.28).—‘When a decision is passed in accordance with
local custom, logic or the opinion of traders, the issue of the case is
over-ruled by it. When the King, disregarding established custom, passes
sentence, it is called the *edict of the king*, and local custom is
over-ruled by it. The time-honoured institutions of each country, caste
and family should be preserved intact; otherwise the people would rise
in rebellion.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

जातिधर्मः प्रसिद्धः । [जाति ब्राह्मणादिः, तच् च नित्य]त्वेनोच्यते, शास्त्रलक्षणत्वात् । जानपदः सामयिकः, न शास्त्रप्रमाणः, गोप्रचारोदकरक्षणादिः । श्रेणीधर्मो वणिक्कारुककुशीलवानां स्वकार्यसिद्ध्यर्थं प्रवर्ति[तः । त]म् अपि धर्मं राजा प्रतिपादयेत् । न सामयिको ऽयम् इत्य् अनास्था कर्तव्या । यदि च राजा सामायिकेष्व् अनादरं कुर्यात्, ततो व्यवस्थाभङ्गा मात्स्यन्यायः प्रवर्तते ॥ ८.४१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

041	(A king) who knows the sacred law, must inquire into the laws of castes (gati), of districts, of guilds, and of families, and (thus) settle the peculiar law of each.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/042_svAni_karmANi.md">
<details open><summary><h3>042 स्वानि कर्माणि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

स्वानि कर्माणि कुर्वाणा  
दूरे सन्तो ऽपि मानवाः ।  
प्रिया भवन्ति लोकस्य  
स्वे स्वे कर्मण्य् अवस्थिताः  ॥ ८.४२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/042_svAni_karmANi.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For men following their respective occupations,—even though living at a distance,—come to be liked by the people, while they remain firm in their own duties.—(42)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वोक्तस्य जानपदादेर् धर्मस्य दृष्टादृष्टतानेन प्रदर्श्यते । **स्वानि कर्माणि** कुलस्थित्यनुरूपाणि ये कुर्वन्ति ते दूरस्था अपि **प्रिया भवन्ति** । सर्वस्यान्यो निकटवर्ती संसर्गातिशयात् प्रियो भवति । स्वकर्मकारी तु दूरस्थ एव प्रियः । **स्वे स्वे कर्मण्य् अवस्थिता** इत्य् अनेन परकर्माननुष्ठानम् आह । ये न परकर्माणि कुर्वन्ति ते सर्वस्य प्रिया भवन्तीति श्लोकार्थः ॥ ८.४२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse shows that the aforesaid ‘local’ and other laws serve both
visible (temporal) and invisible (spiritual) purposes.

‘*Their respective occupations*,’—in accordance with the condition of
their families;—the men who follow these^(‘)*come to be liked*.’ As a
rule it is only men living near each other that come to be liked; but
the man who follows his own occupation is liked also when he is at a
distance.

‘*While they remain firm in their own duties*’;—this stands for not
encroaching upon the work of other persons;—the meaning of the verse
being that—‘those who do not encroach upon the work of others come to be
liked by all men.’—(42).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (6b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Śukranīti* (4.5.92, 100).—‘Those customs that have been introduced in
the country, caste or race should be maintained in the same condition.
Those whose customs have been received by traditions and have been
practised by their own ancestors are not to he condemned for following
them.’

*Atrisaṃhitā* (12).—(Same as Manu.)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सामयिकधर्मानुपालनप्रशंएयम् (?), प्ररोचनार्था ॥ ८.४२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

042	For men who follow their particular occupations and abide by their particular duty, become dear to people, though they may live at a distance.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/043_notpAdayet_svayam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>043 नोत्पादयेत् स्वयम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

नोत्पादयेत् स्वयं कार्यं  
राजा नाऽप्य् अस्य पुरुषः ।  
न च प्रापितम् अन्येन  
ग्रसेद् अर्थं कथं चन [मेधातिथिपाठः - ग्रसेताऽर्थं]  ॥ ८.४३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/043_notpAdayet_svayam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Neither the king himself nor any servant of his shall promote a suit; nor shall he suppress a suit that has been brought up by another person.—(43)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**कार्यं** विवादवस्तु । तद् **राजा स्वयं** **न** प्रवर्तयेत् । कस्यचिद् दूष्यस्योपघातार्थं धनिनो वा धनग्रहणार्थं न तदीयम् ऋणिकम् अन्यं वापराद्धम् उद्वेजयेत्- एष ते धारयति किम् इति ममाग्रतो नाकर्षसि, एतेन वा तावद् अपराद्धं यावद् अहम् एनं निपातयामि — इत्य् एवं राज्ञा न कर्तव्यम्, सत्य् अपि द्वेषे धनलोभे वा । **न च प्रापितम्** आवेदितम् **अन्येना**र्थिना **ग्रसेत** निगिरेन् नोपेक्षेतेति यावत् । अवधीरणायां निगिरेद् इति प्रयुज्यते । तत्समानार्थश् च ग्रसतिः । तथा च वक्तारो भवन्ति यावत् किंचिद् अस्योच्यते तत् सर्वं निगिरति न किंचिद् अयं प्रतिवक्ति ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तूत्तरं श्लोकार्धम् एवं व्याचक्षते । **न च प्रापितं** व्यवहाराद् अन्येन प्रकारेण्**आर्थं** धनं **ग्रसेत** स्वीकुर्यात् । यदि हि राजा छललेशोद्देशिकया धनदण्डे प्रवर्तेत ततः परलोके दोषो द्रष्टव्यः । स्वराज्ये[^१७०] चोपघातः स्यात् ।


[^१७०]:
     M G DK (1:109) omit: sva-

<u>अथेदम्</u> अपरं केषांचिद् व्याख्यानम् । **नोत्पादयेत् स्वयं कार्यं** **राजा** । साक्षाद् उपलभ्याप्य् अकार्यकारिणं न स्वयं किंचिद् ब्रूयात्, तस्य पराधीनेन यावद् व्यवहारेण नाकृष्टः । येन व्यवहारदर्शनम् एव पराजितस्य निग्रहाय भवति, न राजा । एतच् च ऋणादानादिष्व्[^१७१] एव द्रष्टव्यम् । ये तु स्तेनसाहसिकादयः कण्टकस्थानीयास् तान् राजा स्वयम् एवावगम्य गृह्णीयात् । शेषं समानम् ।   
**नाप्य् अस्य पूरुष** इति अस्य राज्ञः पुरुषो ऽधिकारी मनुष्यः ॥ ८.४३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Suit*’—object of dispute;—none such shall the king himself
‘*promote*’—*i.e*., cause to be instituted;—for encompassing the injury
of some hated persons, or for obtaining the wealth of some rich person,
he shall not instigate his debtor or some other person who may have
suffered at his hands, saying to him—‘you should do such and such a
thing, why do not you bring it up before me?—or, ‘you have been injured
by him, I shall have you avenged’;—any such thing the king shall not
say, even though his hate or greed for riches be great.

When a suit has been ‘*brought up*’—presented before him—he shall not
‘*suppress*’—hush up, ignore, it. The verb ‘*nigiret*,’ ‘swallow,’ is
often used in the sense of *ignoring*; and the root ‘*gram*’ (used in
the text) is synonymous with ‘*ni-gira*’ People make use of such
expressions as—‘everything that is said to-day he *swallows up*, and he
does not answer it.’

Others explain the latter half of the verse as follows:—‘He shall not
appropriate—make his own—any *artha*, *i.e*., money, that is brought to
him in any manner save through the suit.’ If the king were to inflict
fines in an unfair manner, he would he incurring evil in the next world
and bring trouble on his kingdom.

The following is yet another explanation offered by others:—‘*The king
himself shall not promote a suit*’;—*i.e*., even, though he may get at
the offender directly, he himself shall not say anything, until the man
has been brought before him by the man against whom the offence has been
committed, in a regular suit. Because it is only after the man has been
defeated in the suit brought by the other party that it is time for the
king to perform his duty of inflicting the legal punishment. But this
applies only to the non-payment of debts and similar subjects; as for
thieves and criminals,—who are like ‘thorns’ in the kingdom,—these the
king shall capture and punish, even when he catches them himself. The
rest of the verse is as explained before.

‘*Nor any servant of his*’;—‘*servant*,’ *i.e*., person holding an
office under him.—(43)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Anyena*’—‘By another’,—*i.e*., the plaintiff (Medhātithi),—‘the
plaintiff or the defendant’ (Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 22.5), where *Bālambhaṭṭī*
offers the following explanations of the second half of the verse:—(*a*)
The king should not entertain any suit illegally brought up by any
one;—or (*b*) he shall not ignore a suit brought forward by any
one;—(*c*) (if we adopt the reading ‘*na cāprāpitam*’) ‘he shall not
admit into the proceedings any facts not presented by either of the two
parties to the suit.’ The *Subodhinī* reproduces the same explanations.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 605), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Kāryam*’ here means ‘suit,’ ‘dispute’;—any proved fact that may
be adduced during the hearing of the suit, the king should not ignore or
set aside;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (13b), which explains ‘*na graset*’ as
‘he should not ignore’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 15b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (13.27).—‘The litigant shall humbly go to seek the judge.’

*Pitāmaha* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra, p. 61).—‘The King shall not himself
or through his officers, promote law-suits; nor through anger or through
greed or through affection, shall he suppress a suit; nor shall he, on
his own account, institute suits not brought up by the parties
concerned.’

*Nārada* (Do.).—‘The King shall not, either for asserting his power or
through greed for making money out of it, create law-suits among people
who have no disputes among themselves.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**नोत्पादयेत् स्वयम्** उपजापेनार्थिनः कस्यचिद् उपघातस्य पौरजानपदस्य द्वेषाद् धनवतो वा लोभेन राजा, नापि तत्प्रकृतो व्यवहाराणां द्रष्टा राजब्राह्मणः । न चाप्रापितं व्यवहारेण तस्माद् अन्येन प्रकारेण ग्रसेद् अर्थं कथंचन । अथ वा पाठान्तरं व्याख्यायते, न च प्रापितं व्यवहाराद् **अन्येन** प्रकारेण **ग्रसेद् अर्थं कथंचन** । अथ वा पाठान्तरं व्याख्यायते, **न च प्रापितं** व्यवहाराद् **अन्येन** प्रकारेण **ग्रसेद् अर्थं कथंचन** । अन्यथा हि लोभाद् राज्ञः प्ररलोकोपघातश् च स्यात्, दृष्टश् च राज्यतन्त्रोपघातदोषः । अन्यस् त्व् आह नोत्पादयेत् स्वयं कार्यं राजा साक्षाद् अप्य् उपलभ्याकार्यकारिणम्; नापि तत्प्रकृतो राजपुरुषः, येन व्यवहारदर्शनम् एव जयपराजयोर्, इष्टेन तु राजेति नियमो राज्ञः उच्यते । अतो ऽस्य स्वयं दृष्ट्वाप्य् अतिक्रमकारिणम् उत्सृजतो न दोषो ऽस्ति । येन राज्ञा विनार्थिना स्वप्रत्ययेन व्यवहारे ऽवस्थाप्यमाने लोभरागद्वेषप्रतीतौ राज्यतन्त्रविरोधः प्रसज्यते । एवं च बृहस्पतिसमेनापि व्यवहारेणाप्राप्यमाणं न ग्राह्यम् । तथा ह्य् अस्य सर्वलोकानुरञ्जनाद् धर्मराजतन्त्रयशांसि प्रथन्ते । एवं च साक्षिप्रत्याख्यानेनाप्य् अनुमानप्रमाणशुद्धिम् आस्रित्य व्यवहारेषु तत्प्रधानः स्याद्, आन्वीक्षिक्यां चाभिविनीतः । तत्र दृष्टान्तम् आह पूर्वश्लोकार्धेन ॥ ८.४३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

043	Neither the king nor any servant of his shall themselves cause a lawsuit to be begun, or hush up one that has been brought (before them) by (some) other (man).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/044_yathA_nayaty.md">
<details open><summary><h3>044 यथा नयत्य् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यथा नयत्य् असृक्पातैर्  
मृगस्य मृगयुः पदम् ।  
नयेत् तथानुमानेन  
धर्मस्य नृपतिः पदम्  ॥ ८.४४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/044_yathA_nayaty.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Just as the hunter discovers the foot-print of the deer by the drops of blood, so should the king discover the right by means of inference.—(11)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद् उक्तं न स्वयं दृष्ट्वापि राजा सहसा कंचिद् आक्रमेत वा निगृह्णीयाद् यतः नर्मणाप्य् एतत् संभवति । कथं पुनर् एतद् अवगन्तव्यम्,[^१७२] किं परिहासकृतम् एतद् उत क्रोधाद्यनुबन्धकृतम् इति । अत आह **अनुमानेन्**ऐतज् ज्ञातव्यम् । **यथा** **मृगयुर्** मृगव्याधो विद्ध्वा मृगं नष्टं दृष्टिपथाद् अपक्रान्तं छिद्रनिसृतैर् **असृक्पातैः** स्रवद्भिः शोणितैः **पदं मृगस्य नयत्य्** आसादयत्य् एवं राजा**नुमानेन** परोक्षे प्रत्यक्षे वार्थकारणं निश्चिनुयात् । धर्मश् च कृतव्यवहारविषयस् तत्त्वावगमः । उक्तस्याप्य् अनुमानस्य पुनर्वचनं स्मृतिदार्ढ्यार्थम् ॥ ८.४४ ॥


[^१७२]:
     M G DK (1: 74): eva gantavyam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been said above that the king himself shall not, in a hurry
either haul anyone up or punish him for any offence; and the reason for
this lies in the consideration that it is quite possible that the act
that the king regards as an ‘offence’ might have been done in joke. Now
the question arises—how is it to be ascertained whether the act has been
done in joke or through malice and such other causes?

It is in answer to this question that it is said that ‘this is to be
ascertained by means of inference.’—Just as the
‘*hunter*’—fowler—‘*discovers*’—gets at—‘*the foot-print*’ of the deer
that has been wounded and disappeared from view by means of the drops of
blood flowing from the wound,—in the same manner the king should
discover the root-cause of the suit—which may be not perceptible,—by
means of inference.

The term ‘*dharma*,’ ‘*right*,’ here stands for *the real facts of the
case*.

The restriction of ‘inference’ as a means of finding out truth, already
mentioned before (in verse 3), is for the purpose of emphasising the
point.—(44)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Cf*. 12.104; also the *Mahābhārata* 12.132.21.

‘*Padam*’—‘Footsteps’ (Medhātithi and Govindarāja)—and ‘lair’ (Kullūka
and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in, *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 30);—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 56);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (5a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (11.23-24).—‘Reasoning is a means of getting at the truth;
coming to a conclusion through that, he shall decide properly.’

*Āpastamba* (2.29.6).—‘In doubtful eases they shall give their decision
after having ascertained the truth by inference, ordeals and the like.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.4-5).—‘Let him reason properly regarding an offence;
finally the offence will become evident thereby.’

*Nārada* (1.38).—‘As a huntsman traces the vestiges of a wounded deer in
a thicket by the drops of blood, even so let the King trace justice.’

Do. (1.40).—‘When it is impossible to act up to the precepts of sacred
law, it becomes necessary to adopt a method founded on reasoning.’

*Bṛhaspati* (1.32).—‘The insight of kings surpasses by far the
understandings of other persons, in the deciding of the highest, lowest
and middling disputes.’

*Mahābhārata* (12.132.21).—‘Just as of a wounded deer, one foot-print
leads to another through the blood-mark, so oven shall the King trace
the steps of justice.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

तथा च प्रत्यक्षागमाव् उत्सृज्यानुमानप्रधानो व्यवहारगतौ स्याद् इत्य् अनुमानप्रशंसैषा । येन [न] सर्वः लोकप्रत्यक्षो योग्यो ऽर्थः न्याय्या स्तुतिः या प्रत्यक्षागमप्रत्याख्यानेन वेदितव्या । तथा च शेषशेषिभावाद् अपुनरुक्तौ पूर्वोत्तरश्लोकौ । अधुना व्यवहारेषु परमार्थावधारणार्थम् इदं द्रष्टुः प्रसंख्यानम् उच्यते ॥ ८.४४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

044	As a hunter traces the lair of a (wounded) deer by the drops of blood, even so the king shall discover on which side the right lies, by inferences (from the facts).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/045_satyam_artham.md">
<details open><summary><h3>045 सत्यम् अर्थम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सत्यम् अर्थं च सम्पश्येद्  
आत्मानम् अथ साक्षिणः [मेधातिथिपाठः - साक्षिणम्] ।  
देशं रूपं च कालं च  
व्यवहारविधौ स्थितः  ॥ ८.४५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/045_satyam_artham.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When engaged in judicial proceedings, the king shall keep his eye upon the truth, upon the object, upon himself, the witness and upon the place, the time and the aspect.—(45)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**व्यवहारविधौ** व्यवहारकर्मणि **स्थितः** प्रवृत्तो न केवलं व्यवहाराक्षराणि **संपश्येद्** यावद् एतद् अपरं सत्यादि । 

तत्र **सत्यस्य** दर्शनं — यद्य् अप्य् अर्थिप्रत्यर्थिनोर् अन्यतरेण शालीनतया परिपूर्णाक्षरं नाभिहितं तथापि यदि राजा प्रमाणान्तरतः पूर्वोक्ताद् वानुमानाद् एव कथंचिद् ईदृशो ऽयम् अर्थ इति निश्चेतुं पारयेत् तदा तद् आश्रयेन् नोपेक्षेत, अनेनैतन् न सर्वम् उक्तम् इति । तद् उक्तम्- "छलं निरस्य भूतेषु व्यवहारान् नयेन् नृपः" (य्ध् २.१९) इति ।   

**अर्थस्य** दर्शनम् — **अर्थ**शब्दो धनवचनः प्रयोजनवचनो वा । तत्र यदि महान्तम् अर्थम् आसादयेत् तदा त्यक्त्वाप्य् अन्यानि राजकार्याणि नोद्विजेत, व्यवहारेक्षणं कुर्याद् एव । अथ वा यदि कश्चिद् ब्रूयात् साक्षिभिर् अर्थ एतस्माद् गृहीतो ऽन्येन वा सभ्येन[^१७३] तत्र निरूपयितव्यं यद् एतद् व्यवहारपदं यदि स्वल्पं न संभवति धनग्रहणम् । अथ गुरु सभ्याः साक्षिणश् च दैन्यं गतास् तदा संभावनीयं प्रमाणान्तराच् च निश्चेतव्यम् । 



[^१७३]:
     M G: satyena

एतच् **चात्मानं साक्षिणं** कृत्वा गवेषणीयम् । एतद् उक्तं भवति । कण्टकशोधनन्यायेन चारैश् चारयेत् । अथ वात्मानं संपश्येद् आत्मनो ऽवस्थां संपश्येत् कोशक्षयं महाकोशतां वा । अस्मिन् पक्षे साक्षिण इति स्वतन्त्रं पदम् ।   

**देशस्य** दर्शनम् — क्वचिद् अल्पो ऽप्य् अर्थो महत्त्वम् आसादयति, महान् अपि यो ऽन्यत्र स क्वचिल्[^१७४] लघु भवतीति । एतद् देशस्य दर्शनम् । 



[^१७४]:
     M G: satkavir; PK (1: 75): san kvacit

एवं **कालो** ऽपि द्रष्टव्यः।   

**रूपं** व्यवहारवस्तुस्वभावः । तस्य गुरुलघुतां पश्येद् इति ।


<u>अन्यैश्</u> तु व्याख्यातम् । सत्यार्थयोः सारफलतां पश्येद् आत्मानं साक्षिणं कृत्वा[^१७५] । एतद् उक्तं भवति । अर्थात् सत्यं गुरुत्वेन महाप्रयोजनत्वाद् उभयोर् लोकसाधनरूपतयाश्रयितव्यम् । अर्थस् त्यक्तव्यो ऽसारत्वात् । देशः स्वर्गादिः सत्यसमाश्रयप्राप्यः । कालश् चिरं तत्र वासः । रूपं सुरूपं सुन्दरं महोहरम् । एतद् एव विपरीतम्, सत्यत्यागेन केवलार्थसमाश्रयणात् ॥ ८.४५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*When engaged in*’—dealing with—‘*judicial proceedings*’— the king
shall attend, not only to the mere letter of the suit itself, but also
to truth, etc.

(*a*) ‘*Keep his eye upon the truth*’;—even though the plaintiff or the
defendant, through shyness, may not have stated his case fully, yet if
the king is enabled,—either on the strength of other proofs, or by means
of the ‘inference’ mentioned above,—to find out what the actual facts of
the case are, then he shall, by all means accept them,—and not reject
them, simply because the party concerned did not state them in full.
This is what has been thus declared—‘Having sifted all fraud, the king
shall decide the case on facts.’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra* 19.)

(*b*) ‘*Keep eye upon the object*’;—the term ‘*artha*,’ ‘*object*,’
denotes *wealth or purpose*. The meaning thus is that if he obtains a
large amount of wealth (as the legal fee), then he shall even give up
all other business of state and not hesitate to take up the ease brought
up; in fact he shall begin the investigation at once. Or, the meaning
may be that if some one tells him that the witnesses in the case, or
some member of the Court, have received large amounts in bribe from such
and such a party,—then he should examine this statement in the following
manner.—‘If the cause of the suit is insignificant, the acceptance of a
large bribe is not possible;—but if the cause is worth much, and the
members of the court and the witnesses are in poor circumstances, then
it is just possible’; and the truth shall he found out by other means.
This is to be done by making (*c*) ‘*himself*’ the ‘*witness*’ (*d*).
That is to say, with a view to tracing out the bad characters in his
kingdom, he shall get spies to find out the truth.

Or ‘*having an eye upon himself*’ (*e*) may mean that he must attend to
his own circumstances,—*i.e*., he should see whether his treasury is
depleted or full.

Under this construction ‘*witness*’ is an independent word (and not in
apposition to ‘*himself*,’ as in the former interpretation).

(*e*) ‘*Having an eye upon the place*’;—in certain places even a small
object becomes great, while in another even a great object becomes
small. This is what is meant by ‘*having an eye upon the place*.’

(*f*) Similarly he should have his eye upon the *time* also.

(*g*) ‘*Aspect*’ stands for the nature of the cause; he shall find out
whether it is important or unimportant.

Others have explained the verse as follows:—‘He shall find out the real
nature of (*a*) the *truth* and (*b*) the *object* of the suit, by
making (*c*) *himself* the *witness* (*d*); that is to say, he shall
find out that *truth* is more important than any *object*, since it
accomplishes very important ends and is useful in both worlds, and hence
he should always have recourse to *truth*, and ignore the *object*,
which is devoid of essence. (*e*) ‘*Place*,’ in this case stands for
heaven and the other regions, obtainable by means of truth; (*f*)
‘*time*’ for a prolonged stay in other regions, and (*g*) ‘*aspect*’ for
the beauty of the celestial damsels. And the reverse of all this is
obtained by the renouncing of *truth* and the following of other
*objects*.—(45).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Artham*’—The value of the suit and the motive behind it’
(Medhātithi);—‘such suit as deals with things of value, like cattle,
gold and the like’ (Kullūka);—‘money realisable by fine’
(Nārāyaṇa);—‘the aim’ (Nandana).

‘*Ātmānam sākśiṇam*’—‘Looking upon himself as the witness’; or ‘looking
upon his own position, and that of the witness adduced’
(Medhātithi);—Kullūka and others have the latter explanation only.

^(‘)*Deśam kālam*’—‘Considerations of the place and time of the offence
committed’ (Medhātithi and Rāghavānanda); ‘what is befitting the time
and place’ (Kullūka);—‘customs of the country and what is befitting the
time’ (Nārāyaṇa); ‘place of offence and age of the offender’
(Govindarāja); ‘Heavy and continued residence there’ (‘others’ in
Medhātithi).

‘*Rūpam*’—‘Aspect of the case’ (Medhātithi, Kullūka and Nandana);—‘looks
of the parties’ (Narāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda);—‘beauty of the celestial
damsels’ (‘others’ in Medhātithi),

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (p. 5a), which has the
following notes:—‘*Satyam paśyet*’, the meaning is that even though the
statements of the two parties are not clear enough to justify a
decision, yet if, by inference and other means, the king is able to form
some decision, he should fix upon that;—‘*artham*’, gold, cattle and
other kinds of property;—‘*ātmānam*’, he should look upon himself as
participating in the effects of the trial;—‘*rūpam*’, form of the object
in dispute, *i.e*., its importance or otherwise.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.19).—‘The King shall investigate suits, by setting
aside mistake or casuistry by facts.’

*Nārada* (1.29-31).—‘Truth rests on true facts; Error is what rests on
mistake of facts. Ordeals even are rendered nugatory by artful men;
therefore let no mistake be committed in regard to place, time, quantity
and so on. A king who acts justly must reject error when it is brought
forward and seek truth alone; because prosperity depends on due
performance of duty.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सत्यार्थयोः सारफल्गुतां पश्येद् आत्मानं **साक्षिणं** कृत्वा, तथात्मनो महति स्थाने स्वर्गादौ धर्मेणावस्थानम्, अवस्थानकालं च तस्य महान्तम् । अथ वा कालं च आयुषः, इहाल्पं जरसाभिभवाद्; आत्मनो रूपविपर्ययः अनेकव्याधियोगाच् च । अथ वा रूपं तनुमनस्तृप्तिकरं निरवद्यम् अप्रत्यनीकं निरतिशयसुखोपभोगं च स्वर्गवासिनाम् अभिसमीक्ष्यार्थत्यागेन **सत्यं** परिगृह्णीयात् स्वर्गप्राप्तिसाधनम् । अथ वा पाठान्तरम् अस्येदम् अन्यत्- "सत्यम् अर्थेषु" व्यवहारेषु **संपश्येत्** । न छलम् इति छलप्रतिषेधार्थो ऽयम् आरम्भयत्नः । शेषम् अन्यद् यथोक्तम् ॥ ८.४५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

045	When engaged in judicial proceedings he must pay full attention to the truth, to the object (of the dispute), (and) to himself, next to the witnesses, to the place, to the time, and to the aspect.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/046_sadbhir_Acharitam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>046 सद्भिर् आचरितम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सद्भिर् आचरितं यत् स्याद्  
धार्मिकैश् च द्विजातिभिः ।  
तद् देश-कुल-जातीनाम्  
अविरुद्धं प्रकल्पयेत्  ॥ ८.४६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/046_sadbhir_Acharitam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

What may be found to have been observed in practice by the good and the righteous twice-born men, that he shall ordain for countries, families and castes,—provided that it is not antagonistic.—(46)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सन्तः** प्रतिषिद्धवर्जकाः, **धार्मिकाः** विहितानुष्ठायिनः । यद्य् अप्य् एक एव शब्द उभयम् अर्थं प्रतिपादयितुं शक्नोति तथापि भेदोपानानाद् विषयविभागेनैवं व्याख्यायते । तैर् **यद् आचरितम्** अनुपलभ्यमानश्रुतिस्मृतिवाक्यं **तद् देशकुलजातीनां प्रकल्पयेद्** अनुष्ठापयेत् । **अविरुद्धं** श्रुतिस्मृतिभिर् उपलभ्यमानाभिः । यद् उक्तम् "जातिजानपदान् धर्मान्" (म्ध् ८.४१) इत्य् अत्र श्लोके देशकुलाद्याचारस्य प्रामाण्यम्, तस्यानेन विशेषः कथ्यते । आम्नायेनाविरोधे[^१७६] तत् प्रमाणम्, न विरोधे तत् प्रमाणम् । तेन दृष्टार्थान्य् अपि ग्रामदेशराजकार्याणि शास्त्राविरुद्धान्य् आदरणीयानि, न विरुद्धानि । यथा क्वचिद् देश ऋणिक आत्मानं विक्रय्य धनं दाप्यते । तच् च "कर्मणापि समम्" (म्ध् ८.१७७) इत्य् अनेन विरुद्धम् । अन्यच् च श्लोकेन दर्शितम् । अन्यस्य त्व् आचारस्य शिष्टसंबन्धितयैव प्रामाण्यम् उक्तम् "आचारश् चैव साधूनाम्" (म्ध् २.६) इति । न च तद्विरुद्धार्थसमाचरणेन साधुत्वम् उपपद्यते । तस्माद् यन् नादृष्टाय[^१७७] तद्विषयो ऽयम् उपदेशः ।


[^१७७]:
     M G DK (1:77): tasmāc ca nādṛṣṭāya (not in DK 5: 118)


[^१७६]:
     M G J DK 1: 77: -āvirodhena (I follow DK 5: 118; see na virodhe in the second half of the sentence)

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्यस् त्व् आह । देशान्तरे धार्मिकैः सद्भिर् द्विजैर् यद् अविरुद्धं[^१७८] श्रुत्या स्मृत्यन्तरेण वाचर्यते तद् देशान्तरे ऽपि राजा प्रकल्पयेत् । यथा उद्वृषभयज्ञादय उदीच्येषु प्रसिद्धास् ते प्राच्यैर् दाक्षिणात्यैः प्रतीच्यैश् चानुष्ठेयाः । कुतः । आचाराद् धि स्मृतिर् अनुमातव्या, स्मृतेः श्रुतिः । सा च यद्य् एवम् अनुमीयते "उदीच्यैर् एतत् कर्तव्यम्" इति, तत्र तद्धितस्य बहुष्व् अर्थेषु स्मरणात् "तत्र जातः" (पाण् ४.३.२५), "तत्र भवः" (पाण् ४.३.५३), "तत आगतः" (पान् ४.३.७४), तम् अभिप्रस्थितः "शेषे" (पाण् ४.२.९२) इति चैतस्य लक्षणविकारोभयरूपत्वाद्[^१७९] अन्येष्व् अप्य् अर्थेषु प्रतिपदम् अनुपातेषु[^१८०] तद्धितस्मरणान् नास्त्य् उदीच्यो नाम, य उदीच्यशब्देन निवर्त्येत । ततश् च पुरुषमात्रेणैतत् कर्तव्यम् इत्य् आपतति, देशसमाख्याया नियतनिमित्तत्वाभावेनानियामकत्वात् । अथैवं वाक्यम् अनुमीयेत- "उदीच्यां जातेन तद्देशवासिना वा," तद् अपि व्यभिचारि । तत्र जातो ऽपि[^१८१] नान्यत्र करोति, तन्निवास्य् अप्य् अन्यत्र जातो न करोत्य् एव । अथ "उदग्देशाभिजनस् तन्निवासी च" इति- अनित्यत्वाद्[^१८२] अभिजननिवासयोस् तद् अपि न युक्तम् एव । न हि जातिगुणगोत्राणीवाभिजननिवासौ नित्यौ । तस्मान् नित्यस्य[^१८३] कस्यचिद् अनुष्ठातॄणाम् अवछेदकस्यानुपपत्तेः सर्वविषया धर्माः । न देशधर्मा नाम केचन सन्ति । अनेनैव न्यायेन कुलधर्मा अपि । 


[^१८३]:
     M G add: na; DK add: ca


[^१८२]:
     J: nityatvād


[^१८१]:
     M G: tavato 'pi; DK (1: 78) tajjāto 'pi


[^१८०]:
     DK 5: 118: anupātteṣu (not in DK 1: 77)


[^१७९]:
     DK (1: 77; 5: 118): lakṣaṇādhikārobhaya- 


[^१७८]:
     M G: yadi viruddhaṃ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कथं तर्हि "देशधर्माः कुलधर्माः" इति च स्मृतिकारैर् भेदेन व्यपदिश्यन्ते । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;उक्तं दृष्टार्था नियता व्यवस्था । तत्र धर्मस् तस्य च नियम उपपद्यत इति उक्तम् । कुलं च गोत्रैकदेशः । यस् तु कृत्स्नगोत्रधर्मः, यथा "न वासिष्ठा वैश्वामित्रैः संबध्नीयुः"[^१८४] इति, स नित्यत्वाद् गोत्रव्यपदेशस्य नित्य एवेति[^१८५] विरम्यते ॥ ८.४६ ॥


[^१८५]:
     M G: tāny asyeti; DK nānyasyeti


[^१८४]:
     M G DK: vaiśvāmitram avadhīr

_यत् सर्वेषु व्यवहारपदेषु साधारणं तद् उक्तम् । विशेषविवक्षायाम् इदम् आह ।_
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Good*’—those who eschew what is forbidden;—‘*righteous*’—those who do
what is enjoined. Though either one of these two words would have
sufficed to express what is meant, yet they have both been used; that is
the reason why we have explained them as having two different
meanings.—What is practised by such persons, and in support of which we
do not find any *Śruti* or *Smṛti* texts,—‘*that he shall ordain*’—cause
to be acted up to—‘*for countries, families and castes*’;—‘*provided
that it is not antagonistic*’—to directly perceptible *Śruti* and
*Smṛti* texts.

Verse 41 has declared the authoritative character of ‘provincial laws,
laws of families, etc., etc.’; and the present verse adds the
qualification that such laws shall be not opposed to the scriptures.
Local and king-made laws also, even when they pertain to temporal
affairs, are to be obeyed only when they are not contrary to the
scriptures. For instance, in some places the debtor is made to repay the
debt by selling himself; and this is contrary to the Smṛti text—‘by
service also the debt may be liquidated, etc.’ (*Manu*, 177); as is
shown under that verse. Further, under 2.6, the authority of *Practice*
(usage) has been explained as based only upon the fact of its being
connected with (observed by) cultured men; and no man can be called
‘cultured’ if he acts contrary to the scriptures. Hence the present
Terse is meant to be applicable to such practices as do not pertain to
spiritual matters.

Another writer explains the text as follows:—What is practised by the
good and righteous twice-born men in one country, the king should
introduce in another country also, if it is found to ho not antagonistic
to *Śruti* and *Smṛti* texts. *E.g*., the bull-sacrifice and other
similar acts that are well known among the people of the North should be
made to be performed by the people of the East, South and West also.
Because from usage, we deduce the corresponding *Smṛti*, and from this
latter the corresponding *Śruti*; so that if the text thus deduced on
the strength of the practice of the northerners were in some such form
as that such and such a sacrifice shall he performed by the *udīcyas,
people of the north*’—then since the nominal affix conveys several such
meanings,—such as (*a*) birth, (*b*) source, (*c*) origin, (*d*)
destination and (*e*) supplement,—all which fall within one or other of
the two categories of ‘distinctive’ feature and ‘modification,’—none of
these as denoted by the nominal affix in the term ‘*udīcya*’ could help
to mark off any people that could be called ‘*udīcya*’ ‘northerner’; so
that the meaning of the said deduced text would come to be that *every
man* should perform the act in question; specially as the exact
denotation of names of countries is always vague. Even if the text
deduced were in the form—‘the act is to be done by one who is born in
the north, or who lives in that country,’—then this would not be
compatible with facts; since as a matter of fact, a man, even though
horn in a particular country, does not follow its usage when he lives
elsewhere, or even though a man may be living in a certain country, he
does not adopt its practice if he is not born there. If again, the terms
used were ‘the native or inhabitant of such and such a country,’ then
also, in as much as *nativity* and *habitation* are always uncertain,
this also would not be right; neither *nativity* nor *habitation* is
fixed to the same extent as one’s *caste* or *qualities* or *race*. Thus
there being no such term as would infallibly single out the performers
of the acts in question, they should he taken as to be performed by all
men; so that there is no such thing as ‘local usage.’ The same reasoning
holds good regarding ‘family usage’ also.

“If this is so, then how is it that *smṛti-writers* mention ‘local
usage,’ ‘family usage’ and ‘caste-usage’ as distinct from one another?”

It has been already explained that the restriction of the acts concerned
is for temporal purposes; and in this sense the restriction regarding
acts is quite reasonable.

‘*Family*’ is a part of ‘race.’ The duty that is laid down for the
entire *race*,—such as people of the Vaśiṣṭha-race shall not mix with
those of the Viśvāmitra-race,’—are to be regarded as binding, since
race-names are fixed for all time.—(46)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

According to Medhātithi this verse permits the king to admit the
authority of only such local and family customs and practices as are
*not contrary to Śruti and Smṛti*,—Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda,
however, take it to mean that he is to accept as authority only such
scriptural rules of conduct *as are not contrary to local and family
customs*,—According to ‘others’ (mentioned by Medhātithi) what, the
verse means is that ‘whatever virtuous practices the king finds being
followed in one country, those he shall introduce in other countries
also, if they are not contrary to scriptural texts.’

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 25), which says
that family and country customs are to be regarded as right, but only
when they are not repugnant to *Śruti* and other authoritative sources
of knowledge.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (11.20).—‘The laws of countries, castes and families, which
are not opposed to sacred texts, have authority.’

*Āpastamba* (2.15.1).—‘The law of custom observed in particular
countries and families.’

*Kātyāyana* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra, p. 58).—‘Therefore the King shall
decide suits according to the scriptures; in the absence of texts
bearing upon the subject, he shall come to a decision on the basis of
the custom obtaining in the land. That is called the *custom* of a land
which has been followed for all time and which is not repugnant to Śruti
or Smṛti.’

*Pitāmaha* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra, p. 58).—‘Whatever is done by the
elders,—be it right or wrong,—in accordance with the practice prevalent
in the land or in the family, is called *custom*. For villages,
corporations, cities, guilds, traders and army, suits should be dealt
with according to custom;—so says Bṛhaspati. When the dispute lies
between parties belonging to these same corporations, etc., their custom
is the determining factor; but when it lies between them and others,
then it is to be dealt with according to the scriptures.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**सद्भिः** प्रतिषिद्धवर्जकैः, **धार्मिकैश्** च विहितार्थानुष्ठातृभिः । अथ वा **धार्मिकैः सद्भिः**, सच्छब्दः सत्तार्थो न पुनरुक्तसामर्थ्याद् । उभयविशेषणैर् ब्राह्मणैः । अथ वा **सद्भिर्** अध्ययनविज्ञानवद्भिः, **धार्मिकैश् च** शास्त्रार्थस्थैर् **यद् आचरितं स्यात्, तद् देशकुलजातीनां** वेदस्मृतिशास्त्राविरुद्धं **प्रकल्पयेत्** । तथा च स्मृत्यन्तरं "शिष्ट्[आचारश् च शास्त्राविरुद्धं] प्रमाणम्" । न तु तद्विरोधि, शुकशारिकाभक्षणादि । एवं च यच् छिष्टैः कथंचित् कदाचित् चाचरितं गृह्यमाणार्थतया तद् राज्ञा निर्वर्त्यम् । अथ वा जातिजानपदादिधर्माणाम् उ[पदेशार्थो ऽयम् आर]म्भः । ते हि दृष्टार्था अपि सन्तः शास्त्राविरुद्धा एव राज्ञा कर्तव्याः । न तद्विरोधिनः । यतः "जातिजानपदं धर्मं" श्लोकशेष एवायम् । एवं चास्यापौनरुक्त्यं विज्ञेयम् ।

यत् त्व् आह **सद्भिर् आचरितं यत् स्याद्** इत्य् एतच् छ्लोकार्थम् । देशान्तरे **धार्मिकैः सद्भिर्** यद् आचर्यते **अविरुद्धं** श्रुत्या स्मृत्यन्तरेण वा तद् देशान्तरे ऽपि राजा [प्रकल्पयेत्, तद्देशस्थ्]आन् करायेत् (?) । तथा कुलैकदेशकालनियतम्, कर्णवेधादि यद् आचर्यते, तद् अपि कृत्स्ने कुले प्रकल्पयेत् । एवं विजातिनिमित्तो यो विवाहकाले ऽध्य्[आयादिः प्रवर्तितो भवति तम्] अपि सर्वस्यां जातौ प्रकल्पयेत् । राजावष्टम्भाच् चैषां धर्मानां प्रथनम् (?) अवस्थितिश् च यथा स्याद् इत्य् अवम् अर्थं राजधर्षूच्यते । कृतपरिभाषं व्यवहारदर्शनम् अधुना प्रस्तूयते ॥ ८.४६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

046	What may have been practised by the virtuous, by such twice-born men as are devoted to the law, that he shall establish as law, if it be not opposed to the (customs of) countries, families, and castes (gati).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/047_adhamarNArthasiddhyartham_uttamarNena.md">
<details open><summary><h3>047 अधमर्णार्थसिद्ध्यर्थम् उत्तमर्णेन ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अधमर्णार्थसिद्ध्यर्थम्  
उत्तमर्णेन चोदितः ।  
दापयेद् धनिकस्याऽर्थम्  
अधमर्णाद् विभावितम्  ॥ ८.४७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/047_adhamarNArthasiddhyartham_uttamarNena.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

On being prayed by the creditor for the recovery of money from the debtor, he shall make the debtor pay to the creditor the money proved to be due.—(47)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"सोपचयं कालान्तरे दास्यामि" इति यो धनम् अन्यस्माद् गृह्णाति सो **ऽधर्मर्णः** । यस् तु "सोपचयं प्रत्यादास्यामि" इति प्रयुङ्क्ते स **उत्तमर्णः** । संबन्धिशब्धाव् एतौ । अधमर्णस्यार्थः । **अर्थो** धनं प्रकरणाद् यद् एवोत्तमर्णाय देयं तद् एवोच्यते । तस्य **सिद्धिर्** उत्तमर्णं प्रति निर्याणम्[^१८६] । द्वितीयो ऽर्थशब्दः प्रयोजनवचनः । अयं समुदायार्थः । उत्तमर्णेन यदा राजा **चोदितो** भवत्य् अधमर्णेन यो गृहीतो ऽर्थः स मे सिद्ध्यतु, दापयतु, भवान्, राजा  त्व् अधमर्णात् तदा **दापयेद् धनिकस्यार्थम्** । धनम् अस्यास्तीति **धनिकः** । उत्तमर्ण एव च प्रसिद्ध्या धनिक उच्यते । **दापयेद्** इति संबन्धाच् चतुर्थी प्राप्ता । सा त्व् अपूर्णत्वात् संप्रदानभावस्य न कृता । यथा घ्नतः पृष्ठं ददाति, रजकस्य वस्त्रं ददातीति । न ह्य् अत्र मुख्यो ददात्यर्थः । इहाप्य् उभयोः स्वत्वस्य भावाद् उभयोः स्वत्वाभावाद् अपरिपूर्णो ददातीत्यर्थः ।


[^१८६]:
     M G: niryaṇam; J: niryaṇaḥ

किम् उत्तमर्णवचनाद् एवासौ दापयितव्यः । नेत्य् आह- **विभावितम्** इति । यदा निश्चितेन प्रमाणेन धारयतीति प्रतिपद्यते । अथ वा **विभावितः** स्वयं प्रतिपन्नः । यतो विप्रतिपन्नस्य वक्ष्यति "अपह्नवे ऽधमर्णस्य" (म्ध् ८.५२) इति । कथं पुनः स्वयं प्रतिपन्नो विभावित इत्य् उच्यते । नैष दोषः । विस्मरणे स्वहस्तलेख्यादिना स्वयं प्रतिपन्नश् च भवति । विभावितश् चाप्रतिपन्नश् च जानानो ऽपि मिथ्याप्रतिपन्नः ॥ ८.४७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The rules that are applicable to all suits in common having been
described, the author now proceeds to lay down those relating
specifically to each of the several kinds of suits.

The man who receives money from another person on the understanding that
at some other time he would re-pay it with interest is called the
‘*debtor*’; and he who lends the money on the understanding that he is
doing it with a view to being repaid with interest is called the
‘*creditor*.’ These two are relative terms.

‘*Money from the debtor*’;—from the context it is clear that this phrase
stands for what is due to the creditor; and the ‘*recovery*’ of this
means its repayment to the creditor. The second ‘*artha*’ stands for
*purpose*, ‘for.’ Thus the meaning of the whole is that—‘when the king
is prayed—petitioned to—by the creditor to the effect that he may be
pleased to make the debtor repay what he had borrowed from him,—then the
King *shall make the debtor pay the money to the creditor*.’

‘*Dhanika*’ is *one who has money*; and it is the creditor who is
called, in ordinary parlance, ‘*Dhanika*.’ In view of the verb ‘*make to
pay*.’—the right case-ending to use would have been the Dative, yeṭ iṭ
has not been used, because the man has not yet become the actual
*recipient*. We have similar usage in such expressions as ‘*ghnataḥ
pṛṣṭham dadati*’ (the man offers his back to the striker), ‘*rajakasya
rastram dadāli*’ (makes over the clothes to the washerman); in neither
of these cases have we the Dative ending, because there is no
transference of ownership; and in the absence of such transference, the
act of *giving* is not completed.

The question arising as to whether the King is to make the debtor pay
simply because the creditor says it is his due, the answer is *no*,—he
shall make him pay only what is *proved to be due*;—*i.e*., only when
the King has assured himself, by indubitable proof, that, the man does
really owe the amount; or ‘*vibhāvitam*’ may be taken to mean
‘admitted’; since the method to be employed regarding *disputed* debts
is going to be laid down below, under verse 52.

“But how can ‘*vibhāvita*’ mean *admitted?*”

There is no force in this objection; it is quite possible that he may
have forgotten about the debt, but on being shown his own writing (on
the deed), he comes to admit it himself; so that though he did not admit
it before, he comes to admit it afterwards; or it. may he that even
though knowing all along that he did borrow the money, he might
dissemble in the beginning (before the producing of the document).—(47)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 76), which adds the
following explanation;—‘when the debtor has received something,—and the
creditor approaches the king for the recovery of that, then the king
should have the creditor’s dues paid to him by the debtor;—if it is
*adhamarṇavibhāvitam*, that is, if it is proved by the creditor that the
amount claimed is really due from the debtor’;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(80b).

The clear meaning, specially in view of verse 51, appears to be ‘if the
debt is *admitted by the debtor*.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (6.20-22).—‘If a creditor sues before the King and fully proves
bis demand, the debtor shall pay as fine to the King a tenth part of the
sum proved. The creditor, having received the sum due, shall pay a
twentieth part of it. If the whole demand has been contested by the
debtor, and even a part of it only has been proved against him, he must
pay the whole.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Rājadharma, 227.4),—‘The man who, having received a
loan, does not repay it in due course, should be compelled to repay it,
and should also he fined the first amercement.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अधमः ऋणे **अधर्मर्णः** । को ऽसौ । गृहीता । कस्य हेतोः । येनासौ तद् ऋणं सोपचयं प्रतिदेयं परिगृह्णाति, अशक्यसंशोध्यं बहुक्लेशं च । दाता तूत्तमर्णः । येनासौ सोपचयं प्रत्यादेयं ददाति । अतश् चोत्तम ऋणे दीयमाने भवति । एवं च सति कालेन द्विगुणीभूते अद्विगुणीभूते वा यदाधमर्णो याच्यमानस् तद्धर्नं न ददाति तदा तस्य सिद्ध्यर्थम् उत्तमर्णेन चोदितो राजा धनिकस्यार्थं दापयेद् अधमर्णाद् अधमर्णं वा । सामान्यो ऽयं व्यवहारनिर्देशः ॥ ८.४७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

047	When a creditor sues (before the king) for the recovery of money from a debtor, let him make the debtor pay the sum which the creditor proves (to be due).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/048_yair_yair.md">
<details open><summary><h3>048 यैर् यैर् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यैर् यैर् उपायैर् अर्थं स्वं  
प्राप्नुयाद् उत्तमर्णिकः ।  
तैर् तैर् उपायैः सङ्गृह्य  
दापयेद् अधमर्णिकम्  ॥ ८.४८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/048_yair_yair.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having determined the means by which the debtor may be able to get his money, he shall, by those same means, make the debtor pay up.—(48)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

नेहाप्राप्तार्थाद् उत्तमर्णाद् राज्ञे भागं वक्ष्यत्य् अधर्मणाद् दण्डम् । तत्र स्वभागतृष्णया राजान उपायान्तरेण धनमार्गणं धनिकानां कारयेयुर् अतस् तन्निवृत्त्यर्थम् इदम् उच्यते । **यैर् यैर्** वक्ष्यमाणैर् **उपायैः** स्वधनं पूर्वप्रयुक्तम् **उत्तमर्णो** लभेत **तैस् तैर्** **अधमर्णं दापयेत्** । **संगृह्य** स्थिरीकृत्य । अनेनैवोपायेनैतस्माद् एतल् लभ्यत इत्य् एतन् निश्चित्येत्य् अर्थः । अथ वानुकूलम् उपसान्त्वनं **संग्रहः**[^१८७] । उत्तमर्ण एव **उत्तमर्णिकः** । उत्तमं च तद् ऋणं चोत्तमर्णम् । तद् अस्यास्तीत्य् **उत्तमर्णिकः** । "अत इनिठनौ" (पाण् ५.२.११५) इति रूपम् । एवम् इतराव् अपि । सर्वधनादिषु प्रक्षेप्तव्याव् अन्यत्र वीरपुरुषको ग्राम इतिवद् बहुव्रीहिणैव सामानाधिकरण्यस्य मत्वर्थे चोक्तार्थाविशेषेण समासः । मत्वरीयश् च दुर्लभः[^१८८] । वृद्धिलाभार्थं प्रयोगविषयं धनम् ऋणम् । द्वौ च तस्य संबन्धिनौ प्रयोक्ता ग्रहीता च । प्रयोजकस्य च तद् उत्तमं भवति । स्वतन्त्रो धनदाने प्रत्यादाने च । इतरस्य सोपचयदानाद् बह्वायामत्वाच् चाधमत्वम् । व्युत्पत्तिमात्रं त्व् एतत् । रूढ्यैव त्व् एतौ प्रयोक्तृग्रहीत्रोर् वाचकौ । के पुनस् तत्रोपाया इत्येतत्प्रदर्शनार्थ उत्तरश्लोकः ॥ ८.४८ ॥


[^१८८]:
     J omits: sarvadhanādiṣu prakṣeptavyāv anyatra . . . matvarīyaś ca durlabhaḥ


[^१८७]:
     M G DK (1: 717): grahaḥ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It is going to be laid down later on that when the debtor is forced to
repay the creditor’s dues, a certain percentage has to be paid to the
King by the debtor, by way of penalty; so that it might be possible for
the King to fall into the temptation of decreeing, without having
recourse to other possible means, the creditor’s suit and thereby adding
to his own income; in order to guard against thiis \[this/thus?\], we
have the present text.

The King shall make the debtor pay up, by those means,—going to be
described—by which the creditor may receive his money;—‘*saṅgṛhya*’
‘*having determined*,’ *i.e*., having ascertained that ‘by such and such
moans alone would the creditor receive his due.’ Or the root ‘*graha*’
in ‘*saṅgṛhya*’ may be taken as denoting *persuasion*.

The term ‘*uttamarṇika*’ is the same as ‘*uttamarṇa*,’ ‘creditor’;
*i.e*., he who has the ‘debt,’ ‘*ṛṇa*,’ to his ‘*good*,’ ‘credit,’
‘*uttama*’; the word being formed with the affix ‘*ṭhan*,’ according to
Pānini 5.2.115; similarly with the other term also (‘*adhamarṇikah*’).
Money advanced for the earning of interest is called ‘*ṛṇa*,’ ‘debt’;
and there are two parties to it, the giver and the receiver; for the
giver the debt is *to the good*, ‘*uttama*,’ as in the matter of giving
it and receiving it he is an independent agent; for the receiver on the
other hand, it is *to the bad*, ‘*adhama*,’ because it is a source of
trouble to him or account of his having to pay interest on it.

These explanations however are offered only by way of explaining the
literal signification of the terms; in reality, they have their
denotation as referring to the *giver* and *receiver*—fixed purely by
conventional usage.

The next verse explains what are the ‘means’ referred to in this
verse.—(48)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 67), which explains
‘*Saṅgṛhya*’ as ‘*vaśīkṛtya*, ‘compelling’;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(78b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bṛhaspati* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra, p. 382).—‘The debtor who has
admitted the loan should be made to pay by such methods as are
conciliatory and so forth; also by such means as force, confinement in
the house and the rest.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रतिपन्नार्थम् अधमर्णं सान्त्वनादिभिर् उपायैर् उत्तमर्णचोदितो दापयेत् । नास्य तन्त्रोत्सादनं कुर्याद् इत्य् एवम् अर्थम् उपायनिर्देशः । धर्मः प्रथमः । एवं चोभयोर् अप्य् अविरोधाद् राज्ञानुग्रहो ऽनुष्ठितो भवति । ते च सामान्यत उक्ताः दापनोपाया विशेषतो निर्दिश्यन्ते ॥ ८.४८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

048	By whatever means a creditor may be able to obtain possession of his property, even by those means may he force the debtor and make him pay.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/049_dharmeNa_vyavahAreNa.md">
<details open><summary><h3>049 धर्मेण व्यवहारेण ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

धर्मेण व्यवहारेण  
छलेनाचरितेन च ।  
प्रयुक्तं साधयेद् अर्थं  
पञ्चमेन बलेन च  ॥ ८.४९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/049_dharmeNa_vyavahAreNa.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall make the advanced money repaid by means of (a) good faith, (b) tactful transaction, (c) trick, (d) moral pressure, and (c) force, the fifth.—(49)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तत्र धर्मस्कन्धकरीत्या स्तोकं स्तोकं ग्रहणम् — "इदम् अद्य, इदं श्व, इदं परश्वः, यथा कुटुम्बसंवाहो ऽस्यैवं वयम् अपि तव कुऋउम्बभूताः संविभागयोग्याः" — इत्यादि पठितप्रयोगो **धर्मः** । यस् तु निःस्वः स **व्यवहारेण**[^१८९] दापयितव्यः । अन्यत्र कर्णोदकवद् धनं दत्वा कृषिवाणिज्यादिना व्यवहारयितव्यम् । तत्रोत्पन्नं धनं तस्माद् ग्रहीतव्यम् । यस् तु व्यवहारो राजनिवेद्यस् तस्य सर्वोपायपरिक्षये योज्यत्वाद् **बल**ग्रहणेन[^१९०] च गृहीतत्वात् । यस् तु साक्षान् न ददाति विद्यमानधनो ऽपि स **छलेन** दापयितव्यः । केनचिद् अपदेशेन विवाहोत्सवादिना कटकाद्याभरणं गृहीत्वा न दातव्यम्, यावद् अनेन तद् धनं न दत्तम् । **आचरितम्** अभोजनगृहद्वारोपवेशनादि । **बलं** राजाधिकरणोपस्थानम् । तत्र राजा साम्नाप्रयच्छन्तं निगृह्य च प्रपीड्य दापयतीति । न तु[^१९१] स्वगृहसंबन्धिधनादि बलम्, यतः "प्रकृतीनां बलं राजा" इति पठ्यते अस्मिन्न् एव प्रसङ्गे उशनसा । 


[^१९१]:
     M G: nanu


[^१९०]:
     M G: bāla-


[^१८९]:
     M G: niḥśvasavyavahāreṇa

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु राज्ञ एवायम् उपदेश इति वर्णयन्ति, राजधर्मप्रकरणात् । राजा ज्ञापित उपायैर् एनं दापयेत् पराजितं स्वयं प्रतिपन्नं च । न तु सहसावष्टभ्य सर्वस्वं धनिने प्रतिपादनीयः । यत उभयानुग्रहो राज्ञा कर्तव्यः । सर्वस्वदाने चाधर्मणस्य कुटुम्बोत्सादः स्यात् सो ऽपि न युक्तः । उक्तं हि-

- नावसाद्य शनैर् दाप्यः काले काले यथोदयम् ।

- ब्राह्मणस् तु विशेषेण धार्मिके सति राजनि ॥ इति ।

तस्मात् किंचन वृद्ध्या संदापनीयः । कुटुम्बाद् अधिकधनसंभवे सर्वं दापनीयः । सर्वासंभवे च "कर्मणापि समं कुर्यात्" (म्ध् ८.१७७) इति । अन्यस्मिन् व्याख्याने छलाचारौ राजानम् अज्ञापयित्वा न कार्यौ ॥ ८.४९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

(*a*) ‘*Dharmeṇa*,’ ‘*by means of good faith*’;—*i.e*., receiving little
by little;—‘so much to-day, so much to-morrow, so much the day after
to-morrow;—just as it behoves him to maintain his family, so also is it
his duty to help me,—I also am a member of his family and as such a
sharer in his wealth,’—the use of such language constitutes ‘*good
faith*.’

(*b*) The man who has absolutely no property should be made to repay the
debt by ‘*tactful transaction*’; on the same principle on which, for the
purpose of drawing out water from the ear one puts more water into it,
the creditor should advance to the debtor more money, in order to enable
him to have recourse to agriculture or trade or some other means of
acquiring wealth, and then receive from him the wealth thus obtained.
The ‘*vyavahāra*’ that consists in filing a suit before the King is not
what is meant by the term as used hero; since one should have recourse
to this only when all other means have failed, and as such it is
included under ‘force.’

(*c*) When, even though possessed of the requisite wealth, the debtor
does not pay in a straight manner, he should be made to pay by means of
‘*trick*’; *i.e*., under some such pretext as that of a
marriage-ceremony or some such occasion, he should borrow from him a
bracelet or some such ornament, and not return it until the debt has
been cleared off.

(*d*) ‘*Moral pressure*’;—by giving up food and constantly sitting at
the man’s door and so forth.

(*e*) ‘*Force*’;—presenting one’self before the King’s court; where the
King shall have the man called quietly and by inflicting some punishment
make him pay up. The ‘*bala*’ of the text does not mean the creditor’s
strength in the shape of his relatives and wealth, etc.; because of the
maxim that the ‘force’ or ‘strength’ of the subject lies in the King,
which has been propounded in connection with the present context.

Others have explained the verse ṭo mean that by the means here
enumerated the *King* shall have the debt repaid;—and their reason for
saying so lies in the fact that it occurs in the context dealing with
the duties of the King. The sense of the verse thus is that ‘when the
amount claimed has been either admitted by the debtor or decreed by the
court, the King shall make him pay it up by these methods;—and he shall
not, all at once, have the entire property of the debtor handed over to
the creditor; since the kindly treatment of both parties constitutes the
King’s duty: and if the debtor’s entire property were handed over to the
creditor, his whole family would perish, and this would not be right. To
this end we have the declaration—‘Without absolutely ruining him, the
debtor should he made to pay little by little, according to his income,
specially so in the case of the Brāhmaṇa,—when the King is righteous.’
So that the man should be made to pay the principal along with a small
amount as interest; but in the event of the man possessing wealth more
than what is needed for the maintenance of his family, he should be made
to pay the entire amount of the claim; and if this be not possible, then
‘the debt shall be liquidated by service, etc.’ (8.177).

In the former explanation, the creditor shall not have recourse to
‘trick’ or ‘moral pressure,’ without notifying the same to the
King.—(49).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vyavahāreṇa*’.—‘By business-transaction: advancing more money to the
debtor with which, as capital, the latter would carry on some trade,
with the profits of which he would gradually clear off the older debt
also’ (Medhātithi);—‘by law-suit’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka and Narāyāṇa;
noted but rejected by Medhātithi);—‘by threatening a suit’
(Nandana);—‘by forced sale of property’ (Rāghavānanda).

Both Buhler and Hopkins represent Medhātithi as explaining this term to
mean ‘forced labour’. But there is nothing in Medhātithi to show this.
What Medhātithi means is quite clear, and it is made clearer by the
illustration given by him of ‘*karṇodaka*’; it is a common practice in
India that when water gets into the ear and cannot be easily got out,
people pour more water into it, and along with this latter, the former
water also flows out.

This verse is quoted in and *Aparārka* (p. 645), which adds the
following notes:—‘*dharma*:’ is ‘truth’,—‘*vyavahāra*’, stands for such
evidence as is documentary, oral and so forth,—‘*chala*’ is
*trick*,—‘*ācaritam*,’ ‘custom of the country’,—‘*balam*’ means
oppression by starving and so forth.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 67);—and in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.40),
which adds the following notes:—‘*dharmeṇa*,’ *i.e*., ‘by truthful
persuasion’,—‘*vyavahāreṇa*’, *i.e*., ‘by adducing witnesses, documents
and other kinds of evidence’,—‘*chalena*’, *i.e*., borrowing from him
ornaments and other things under the pretext of some ceremonies &c. in
the family,—‘*ācaritena*’, *i.e*., by starving,—the fifth method being
the application of ‘*bala*’, force, in the shape of keeping him chained
and so forth;—by these methods is the creditor to recover the money that
he had advanced on interest.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 191);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 19a);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (78b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (4.122).—(Same as Manu.)

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 67).—‘When the debtor is openly
arrested and brought before the assembly of men and kept there till he
pays—this, being in consonance with the custom of the country, is called
*Legal Proceedings*. By beating, by arresting, by work, by law-suit, and
first of all, by peaceful persuasion,—should the creditor obtain
repayment of his dues.’

*Nārada* (1.122).—‘By the mode consonant with religion, by legal
proceedings, by fraud, by customary mode, and fifthly, by force, a
creditor may recover what he has lent.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.54 *et seq*.).—‘When a debtor has admitted a debt, it
may he recovered from him by the expedients of friendly expostulation,
by moral suasion, by artful management, by compulsion and by confinement
in the house. When a debtor is caused to pay by the advice of friends
and kinsmen, by friendly remonstrances, by constant following, or by the
creditor starving himself, it is termed *Moral Suasion*. When a creditor
with a crafty design, borrows something from the debtor and withholds it
as a pledge, and thereby enforces payment of the debt, it is termed
*Artful Management*;—when the debtor is fettered and conducted to the
creditor’s house, where he is compelled by beating and other forcible
means, to pay the debt, it is called *Compulsion*;—when the debtor is
made to pay by confining his son, wife, or cattle, or by sitting at his
door, it is termed *Confinement in the* *House*.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**धर्मेण** साम्नानुद्वेजयन् शनैर् दापयेत्, शपथेन वा संप्रतिपत्तौ । तावद् एवम् अप्रतिपत्तौ व्यवहारेण वक्ष्यति; छलेन वानेकप्रकारेणापि विश्वास्य; आचरितेन वाभोजनगृहद्वारोपवेशनादिना लोकसमाचरितेन; बलेन वा स्वगृहबन्धनादिना मा भूद् अस्यार्थक्षयो राजसमावेशनेन । एवं च सत्य् अत्र नास्ति कश्चिद् धर्मातिक्रमो, यस्माद् अतः —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

049	By moral suasion, by suit of law, by artful management, or by the customary proceeding, a creditor may recover property lent; and fifthly, by force.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/050_yaH_svayam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>050 यः स्वयम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यः स्वयं साधयेद् अर्थम्  
उत्तमर्णो ऽधमर्णिकात् ।  
न स राज्ञाभियोक्तव्यः  
स्वकं संसाधयन् धनम्  ॥ ८.५० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/050_yaH_svayam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The creditor who shall himself recover his money from the debtor should not be prosecuted by the king, for recovering what is his own property.—(50)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तस्यैवार्थस्य स्पष्टीकरणार्थः श्लोकः । न छलादिनोपायेन स्वेच्छय्**ओत्तमर्णो** **ऽधमर्णाद्** धनं **संसाधयन्** **राज्ञा** किंचिद् वक्तव्यः- "माम् अविज्ञाप्य किम् इत्य् अस्माद् आभरणादि स्वधनसंशुद्ध्यर्थं व्याजेन छद्मना गृहीतम्,[^१९२] गृहीत्वा वा[^१९३] किं नास्मै प्रतिप्रयच्छसि" इति ॥ ८.५० ॥


[^१९३]:
     M G J omit: vā


[^१९२]:
     M G J omit: gṛhītam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse serves to make clear what has been said before. If the
creditor recovers his money from the debtor by means of ‘trick’ and the
other methods, the King shall not tell him anything, such as—‘why did
you, without informing me, take from him by trick or fraud, his
ornament, etc., for the purpose of recovering your debt? Why do you not
return it to him?’—(60)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 74), which explains the
meaning to be that if a creditor adopts any of the five methods
mentioned in the preceding verse, he should not be prevented by the king
from doing so and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (p. 80a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (6.18).—‘A creditor recovering, by any means, the loan advanced
by him shall not be reproved by the King.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.40).—‘If a creditor tries to recover an admitted debt,
he shall not be reproved by the King.’

*Nārada* (1.123).—‘A creditor who tries to recover his loan from the
debtor must not be checked by the King, both for secular and religious
reasons.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

स्वगृहसंरोधनादि च कुर्वन्न् अकार्यकारीति कृत्वा **राज्ञा नाभियोक्तव्यः** । उत्तमर्णप्रतिपन्नस् तावद् एवं यथासंभवम् उपायैर् दाप्यः । यः पुनर् इतरः तम् —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

050	A creditor who himself recovers his property from his debtor, must not be blamed by the king for retaking what is his own.
</details>
</details>
</div>

  
## 051-100
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/051_arthe.apavyayamAnam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>051 अर्थे ऽपव्ययमानम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अर्थे ऽपव्ययमानं तु  
करणेन विभावितम् ।  
दापयेद् धनिकस्याऽर्थं  
दण्डलेशं च शक्तितः  ॥ ८.५१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/051_arthe.apavyayamAnam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The man who denies a debt shall be made to pay the creditor’s due, proved by evidence, as also a small fine, according to his means.—(51)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सत्य् अपि विभावके प्रमाणे यो न स्वयं प्रतिपद्यते न तस्य छलाद्युपायप्रयोगः कर्तव्यः । किं तर्हि राजैव तेन ज्ञपयितव्यः । तत्र राज्ञाकारिते **ऽर्थे** ऋणे **ऽपव्ययमानम्** अपह्नुवानम्, "नास्मै किंचन धारयमि" इति वदन्तं, **कारणेन** साक्षिलेख्यभुक्त्यात्मकेन **विभावितं** धारयामीति प्रतिपादितं **दापयेद्** उत्तमर्णाय धनम् । **दण्डलेशं** च स्वल्पं दण्डं दण्डमात्रम् इत्य् अर्थः । अन्यत्र दशमं भागं[^१९५] वक्ष्यति । यस् तु तावद् दातुम् अशक्तः सो ऽल्पम् अपि दशमाद् भागाद् दण्डं दापयितव्यः । अथ वा यः प्रमादात् कथंचिद् विस्मृत्यापजानीते तस्यायं यथाशक्ति दशमभागाल्पतो दण्डः । **कारणं** प्रमाणं त्रिविधम् । तद् अन्यैर् इह संभवतीति परिगणितम् । तथा चाहुः-


[^१९५]:
     M G DK: daṇḍabhāgaṃ

- यत्र न स्यात् कृतं पत्रं साक्षी चैव न विद्यते ।

न चोपलंभः पूर्वोक्तो दैवी तत्र क्रिया भवेत् ॥ इति ॥ ८.५१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Even in the presence of convincing proof, if the debtor does not himself
admit the debt, then recourse should not be had to ‘trick’ and the other
means,—the King should be informed of it; and when summoned by the King,
if the man ‘*denies the debt*,’—saying ‘I do not owe him anything’—then,
on its being ‘*proved by evidence*’—in the shape of written document,
oral witnesses and possession,—and the man being made to confess that he
does owe the debt,—he shall make the debtor repay the ‘*creditor’s
due*,’—‘*as also a small fine*,’ a small penalty, which shall, later on,
he fixed at the tenth part of the claim.

If the man he unable to pay the whole fine, he may be made to pay a fine
even less than the tenth part. Or, the favour of the fine being
inflicted according to the man’s means,—even less than the tenth
part—may be taken as pertaining to the case of the man who denies the
debt (not through perversity, but) through having forgotten all about
it, through carelessness.

‘*Evidence*,’ proof, is of three kinds; thus enumerated elsewhere—‘If
one did not have a written deed executed, nor is there a witness, nor
previous claiming, there the only means is the supernatural one
(ordeal).’—(51)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 76), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Āpavyayamānam*’, ‘denying’,—‘*Karaṇena*,’ ‘by
evidence, documentary and otherwise’,—‘*vibhāvitam*’, ‘faced,
convinced’;—such a debtor the king shall compel to pay the amount to the
creditor;—and by reason of the man having denied what was true, the king
shall exact from him a slight fine also.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 153), which adds that
this rule is meant for the case where the debtor is a well behaved
Brāhmaṇa;—in *Vyavahāratattva* (p. 61);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (p.
80b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (6, 19-20).—‘If the debtor, forced to discharge the debt,
complains to the King, he shall be fined in an equal sum. If a creditor
sues before the King and fully proves his demand, the debtor shall pay
to the King, as fine, the tenth part of the sum proved.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.62).—‘A debtor denying his liability shall be compelled
to pay, on the debt being proved, in court, by a document or by
witnesses.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

करणप्रतिपादितस्य दशभागदण्डं वक्ष्यति ।

> ऋणे देये प्रतिज्ञाते पञ्च्कं शतम् अर्हति ।  
> अपह्नवे तद्द्विगुणं तन् मनोर् अनुशासनम् ॥ इति । (म्ध् ८.१३९)

इयं तु निर्धनस्य दशभागं दातुम् अशक्तस्य गुणवतो वा या काचिद् दण्डमात्रोच्यते इति व्यवस्थार्थम् । न तु निःस्व इत्य् उत्सृज्येत । करणं च यत् संदिग्धे वस्तुनि निर्णयसाधनम्, तत् पुनस् त्रिप्रकारम् । एवं चोशना पऋहति, "यत्र न स्यात् कृतं पत्रं करणं च न विद्यते, न चोपालम्भः पूर्वोक्तस् तत्र दैवी क्रिया भवेत्" । इदानीम् अर्थिप्रत्यर्थिनोर् व्य्वहरतोर् जयपराजयन्यायो वक्तव्य इति यत् इदं तन्निर्देशार्थं प्रकरणम् आरभ्यते ॥ ८.५१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

051	But him who denies a debt which is proved by good evidence, he shall order to pay that debt to the creditor and a small fine according to his circumstances.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/052_apahnave.adhamarNasya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>052 अपह्नवे ऽधमर्णस्य ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अपह्नवे ऽधमर्णस्य  
देहीत्य् उक्तस्य संसदि ।  
अभियोक्ता दिशेद् देश्यं  
करणं वान्यद् उद्दिशेत्  ॥ ८.५२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/052_apahnave.adhamarNasya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

On denial by the debtor, when asked in court to pay the debt, the complainant shall produce a witness, or adduce (other) evidence.—(52)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^१९६]:
     M G: karaṇaṃ

यदा राज्ञा प्राड्विवाकेन वा **संसदि** व्यवहाराधिकरणादिदेशे "देह्य्[^१९७] उत्तमर्णाय धनम्" इति **उक्तस्यापह्नवो** ऽपलापः[^१९८] अधर्मेण भवति, तद्**आभियोक्ता**[^१९९] धनस्य प्रयोक्तोत्तमर्णो[^२००] **दिशेद् देशं** साक्षिणं प्रमाणभूतं निर्दिशेत् । **अन्यद् वा कारणं** लेख्यादि । **देश**शब्देन लक्षणया धनप्रयोगप्रदेशवर्तिनां साक्षिणाम् उपादानात्, **कारण**शब्दः[^२०१] सामान्यशब्दो ऽपि गोबलीवर्दवत् साक्षिव्यतिरिक्तं लेख्यादिकारणम्[^२०२] आचष्टे । ततश् च पाठान्तरम् "कारणं वा समुद्दिशेत्" इति । अस्याप्य् अयम् एवार्थः । 


[^२०२]:
     M G DK (1. 212): -karaṇam


[^२०१]:
     M G DK (1: 212): karaṇa-


[^२००]:
     M G: - marṇāya


[^१९९]:
     M G: tadābhiyukto


[^१९८]:
     M G add: apalāpo


[^१९७]:
     M G omit: dehy

अथ वायम् अन्यः पाठः "अभियुक्तो दिशेद् देशम्" इति । अयं वार्थः । यत्राधमर्णो देहीत्य् उक्तः प्रतिजानीते "सत्यम् एव धनं प्रतिदत्तं तु तत्" इति,[^२०३] यद् असाव् अभियोक्तासीत् स एवाभियुक्तः संवृतः । स चाभियुक्तः संदिशेद् देशम्- "कस्मिन् देशे त्वया मे पर्तिदत्तम्" । कालं च निर्दिशेत्, देशग्रहणस्य प्रदर्शनार्थत्वात् । **कारणं**[^२०४] **वा समुद्दिशेत्** । "अस्ति भो[^२०५] किं कारणं[^२०६] तव प्रतिपादने तत् समुद्दिश" इत्य् एवम् ब्रूयात् । अथ वा दिशेद् देश्यम्- यत् तस्मिन् काले नार्हं साक्ष्यादिप्रदर्शनं[^२०७] कारणं[^२०८] वेति । वाशब्दः चशद्बस्य स्थाने ॥ ८.५२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When, in a court of justice, the debtor is asked by the King or the
judge to repay the debt to (lie creditor,—if this is followed by
‘*denial*’ or evasion by him,—then the ‘*complainant*,’—*i e*., the
lender of the money, the creditor—shall ‘*produce a witness*’ who would
prove his case ,—‘*or adduce other evidence*’—in the shape of a
document, etc.

The term ‘*deśa*’ (lit. *place*) indicates the man present at the place
(where the money was lent); and though the term ‘*kāraṇa*,’ ‘evidence,’
stands for all forms of evidence, and as such includes the *witness*
also, yet here it should be taken as standing for ‘evidence other than
witnesses,’ according to the maxim of ‘the cow and the bull’
(‘*Go-balīvarda*’ where the term ‘go,’ being applicable to both the cow
and the hull, is taken to mean the *cow* only); so that the phrase
‘shall adduce evidence’ must mean ‘shall adduce *other forms* of
evidence.’

Or, the reading may be ‘*abhiyukto diśeddeśam*,’ and the meaning of this
would be as follows:—The debtor, on being asked to pay, answers the
claim by saying ‘it is true that I borrowed the money from him, but I
paid it hack’; and when this happens, the man who was the *complainant*
becomes the *defendant*, and on being thus made the defendant, he should
*question the debtor regarding the place*— at what place did you repay
the debt’?—as also regarding the *time*,—the mention of ‘*place*’ being
only by way of illustration;—‘*or he shall adduce other evidence*’ ‘(of
non-payment)’; *i.e*., he should say ‘I have got other means of proving
my claim’; or it may mean that ‘if he is unable to produce the witness
he should show why ho is so unable’; and in this case the particle
‘*vā*,’ ‘or,’ should be taken to mean ‘*ca*,’ ‘and.’—(52)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Deśam*’—There is no difference in the meaning assigned to the word by
Medhātithi and Kullūka,—both taking it in the sense of ‘witness’; the
meaning ‘place’, attributed to Medhātithi, is however found in Nandana
In his interpretation of Medhātithi, Buhler has been misled by the
explanation that Medhātithi has provided by another reading. (See
*Translation*).

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (24b), which adds the following
explanation:—When on being questioned in court by the king or the judge,
the debtor denies all transaction with the creditor, then the latter who

is the plaintiff, should name the witnesses and cite other proofs in the
form of written documents and so forth:—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 29b), which explains ‘*deśam*’ as ‘witness’, expounding it
as ‘*diṣati artham yathādṛṣṭam*’ and quotes Medhātithi’s explanation on
‘*karaṇam*’ also, which it explains as ‘other proofs’; it remarks that
Medhātithi reads ‘*kāraṇam vā samuddishet*.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bṛhaspati* (11.62).—(See under 51.)

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 67).—‘The debtor shall be openly
arrested and kept in restraint before the assembly of the people, until
he repays the dues, in accordance with the custom of the country.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

इदानीम् अर्थिप्रत्यर्थिनोर् व्यवहरतोः सामान्ये जयपराजयकारणम् उपदिश्यते । गृहीतार्थ्**आपह्नवे** **ऽधमर्णस्य** कदा **देहीत्य् उक्तस्य** प्रयोक्त्रा प्राड्विवाकेन वा **संसदि** व्यवहारस्थाने न स्वैरकथासु, **अभियोक्ता** प्रयोक्ता **दिशेद्** दानाधिकरण**देशम्** । अत्र च देशग्रहणं सामर्थ्यात् साक्ष्युपलक्षणार्थम् । एवं चार्थग्र[हणकाले विद्य्]अमानान् द्रष्टॄन् ब्रूयाद् इति यावत् । अतश् चैतद् एव । यस्माद् आह **करणम् वा समुद्धिशेत्** पत्रसंज्ञं व्यवहारस्थान एव । अतश् च गम्यते देशग्रहणं करणोप[लक्षणार्थम् इति] । गृहीतार्थप्रतिपादकम् इत्य्, अस्याप्य् अयम् एवार्थः पाठान्तरस्य । अथ वा **अपह्नवे ऽधमर्णस्य** व्याजेन **देहीत्य् उक्तस्य संसदि** प्रयोक्त्रा दत्तं [मया इत्य् उक्ते], इदानीम् **अभियुक्तओ दिशेद् देशम्** । देसग्रहणं च निदर्शनार्थत्वात् कालार्थम् अपि द्रष्टव्यम्, "कस्मिन् देशे काले त्वया मम प्रतिदत्त्ं धनम्" इति । **करणं** [**वा समुद्दिशेत्**] अग्रे प्रतिपादककरणं भवतो धनप्रतिपादने । अथ वा **अभियुक्तो देशेद् देश्यम्** इति **देश्यं** देष्टव्यम् । यथा गृहीतं कथयेत् । अन्यद् उभयत्र समानम् ॥ ८.५२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

052	On the denial (of a debt) by a debtor who has been required in court to pay it, the complainant must call (a witness) who was present (when the loan was made), or adduce other evidence.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/053_adeshyaM_yash.md">
<details open><summary><h3>053 अदेश्यं यश् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अदेश्यं यश् च दिशति  
निर्दिश्याऽपह्नुते च यः ।  
यश् चाऽधरोत्तरान् अर्थान्  
विगीतान् नाऽवबुध्यते  ॥ ८.५३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/053_adeshyaM_yash.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who mentions the wrong place,—or who, having mentioned it, retracts,—or who does not understand that his previous and subsequent statements are contradictory;—(53)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तम् एवाधर्मर्णे ऽपह्नुवाने धनिना राजा ज्ञापयितव्यः- "ईदृशी च ज्ञापना कर्तव्या । अस्मिन् देशे ऽस्मिन् काल इदं धनम् इयद् वैतेन मत्सकाशाद् गृहीतम्" । स च पृष्टो भावयति- "नैतस्मिन् देशे ऽहम् अभवं यो ऽनेन च ग्रहणकाल उपदिष्टः" तद् अदेशं दिशति[^२१०] । अथ वा देशसाक्षिणो व्याख्यातास् तान् साक्षिणो देशकालाव् असंभवतो निर्दिशति । निर्दिश्य देशादिकम् अपजानीते "नैतन् मया निर्दिष्टम्" इति । **यश् चाधरोत्तरान् अर्थान्** पौरस्त्यानौपरिष्टांश् च **विगीतान्** विरुद्धान् अभिहितान् **नावबुध्यते** । यद् वा पूर्वं वक्तव्यं तत् परस्माद् वक्ति यत् परतस् तत् पूर्वं क्रमभेदं च वचनगतम् आत्मनो नानुसंधत्ते । "हीनः स इति निर्दिशेत्" (म्ध् ८.५७) इति सर्वत्र क्रियानुषङ्गो भविष्यतीति ॥ ८.५३ ॥


[^२१०]:
     M G J: tadā deśe diśyate (M G dīyate)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been said before that on the debtor denying the debt, the
creditor complains to the King ,—*i e*., the complaint shall be lodged
in the form—‘At such and such place, at such and such time, such and
such an amount of money was borrowed from mo by this man’;—and on being
questioned, he may say ‘I was not at the place at the time,’ referring
to the place and time that have been alleged by him as those at which
the money was borrowed: and in this case he ‘mentions the wrong place.’
Or, the term ‘*deśa*’ may stand for the *witness*; and the text means
‘if he cites as witness a person whose presence at the time and place of
the transaction is impossible.’

Having alleged the place, time, etc., ‘*if he retracts*,’—saying ‘I did
not say this.’

He who does not understand that his ‘*previous statement*’—what he had
alleged before—and his ‘*subsequent statement*’—what he alleges
afterwards—are ‘*contradidory*’;—or if he does not realise the
discrepancy in his own behaviour.

‘*Such a person shall be declared to have failed*’—this verbal clause
(occurring in verse 57) has to be construed with each verse (from 53 to
57).—(53)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Medhātithi is again misrepresented by Buhler; he does not read
‘*apadeśyam*’, the reading adopted by him being ‘*adeśam*’. Nārāyaṇa
also reads the same, not ‘*apadeśyam*.’—Nandana reads ‘*adeyam*’, not
‘*apadeśyam*.’ Buhler has apparently confused verse 53 with 54, where
Medhātithi reads ‘*apadeśam*’ for ‘*apadeśyam*.’

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 108), which has
the following explanation—‘One who cites an impossible witness, or
having cited a possible one, says that he has not cited him, or one who
does not perceive inconsistencies in his own statement, is to be
non-suited;’—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (p. 22b), which has the following
notes:—‘*Adeśam*’ (which is its reading for ‘*adeśyam*’), a place where
the parties have never met;—‘*adharottarān arthān*’, “former and
latter”—‘*vigītān*’, contradictory;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
p. 31b), which adds the following notes:—‘*Ādeśyām dishati*’, ‘says what
is irrelevant or indecorous,—he who having said something says he did
not say it’—‘who does not comprehend the inconsistencies in his own past
and present statements’.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.53-57)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.16).—‘If one party tries to enforce his claim by
himself, though it has been disputed,—or if on being called, he runs
away, without saying anything, he should be non-suited and also fined.’

*Kātyāyana* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra, p. 107).—‘If a party on being
directed to *speak out*, does not speak, he should be immediately
confined; and on the next day he should be declared to be *non-suited*.’

*Nārada* (Aparārka, p. 621).—‘If a party proceeds to enforce his claim
without applying to the King, he should be immediately punished and his
claim not allowed.’

*Nārada* (2.32-33).—‘One who takes to flight after haying received the
summons, one who remains silent, one who is convicted of untruth by the
deposition of witnesses, and one who makes a confession himself;—these
are the four kinds of persons *defeated*, *avasanna*. One who alters his
former statements, one who shuns judicial investigation, one who fails
to appear, one who makes no reply, one who absconds on receiving the
summons;—these are the five kinds of persons *non-suited*, *hīna*.’

*Nārada* (2.41).—‘A man convicted by his own confession, one defeated
through his own conduct, one whom the judicial investigation has proved
to be in the wrong,—these three deserve to have their final defeat
declared at the hands of judges.’

*Bṛhaspati* (5.5-6).—‘One who absconds after receiving the summons, one
who remains silent, one convicted by the deposition of witnesses, and
one who admits the correctness of the charge;—these are the four *losers
of the suit*. One who absconds loses the suit after three fortnights;
one who remains silent, after a week; one convicted by the deposition of
witnesses and one who has confessed, immediately.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 622).—‘After having declared his plaint, if he
renounces it and says something else, then, having taken up a different
position, he becomes non-suited. Having reduced his statement to
writing, if subsequently he says something more or less than that, he
becomes non-suited. After having preferred his claim, if he says *I did
not say this*, or if he contradicts his former statement, he also should
he declared to he non-suited. After having named his witnesses, if he,
of his own accord, does not bring them up for deposition, he should be
declared to be non-suited, after thirty days.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**अदेशं** गृहीतुर् **यश् च दिशति अदेश्यं** वर्थवस्तु; **निर्दिश्यापह्नुते** **च यः** देशं देश्यं वा; यश् **चाधरोत्तरान् अर्थान्**, देशाद् अन्यान्य् अपि कालद्रव्यरूपसंख्यादीन् विगीतान् पूर्वोत्तरविरुद्धान् नावबुद्ध्यते, "हीनं तम् इति निर्दिशेत्" इति वक्ष्यत्य् अर्थिनम् इतरं वा ॥ ८.५३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

053	(The plaintiff) who calls a witness not present at the transaction, who retracts his statements, or does not perceive that his statements (are) confused or contradictory;
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/054_apadishyA-padeshya~n_cha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>054 अपदिश्याऽपदेश्यञ् च ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अपदिश्याऽपदेश्यं च  
पुनर् यस् त्व् अपधावति [मेधातिथिपाठः - अपदिश्याऽपदेशं] ।  
सम्यक् प्रणिहितं चाऽर्थं  
पृष्टः सन् नाऽभिनन्दति  ॥ ८.५४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/054_apadishyA-padeshya~n_cha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who, having put forward a statement, subsequently retracts; and who on being questioned regarding a fact (previously) duly alleged, does not support it;—(54)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वेणार्धेनोक्तस्यार्थस्य निगमनम् । उत्तरेणानुक्तो ऽर्थ उच्यते । यद् उक्तम् "अदेशं यश् च दिशति निर्दिश्यापह्नुते च यः" (म्ध् ८.५३) इति स एवार्थः **अपदिश्येत्य्** अस्य । अदेश एव्**आपदेशः** । तम् **अपदिश्य** कथयित्वा **पुनः** पश्चाद् **अपधावत्य्** अपसरति "नैतौ देशकालौ मम निश्चितौ, यावत्सु देशकालो ऽवधारयति तावद् अयं मह्यम्" इति पश्चाद् ब्रवीति । सो ऽपि तस्माद् अर्थाद् धीयते । 

**सम्यक् प्रणिहितं चार्थम्** अनाकुलं निश्चितम् उक्तं यदा पृच्छ्यते, तदानेनोक्तं[^२११] तत्र किं ब्रवीषि केन वा प्रमाणेन स्वपक्षं साधयसीति पृष्टो न संधत्ते[^२१२] कथान्तरं प्रसौति — "विचारावसानेन किल मे पराजयो भवतीति कालम् उपक्षिपमि" इति — तस्यापि पराजय एव । अथ **वापदेशो** व्याजस् तम् **अपदिश्य्**ओपन्यस्य यो ऽपसरति "अधुना मे महती पीडा समुत्पन्ना न शक्नोमि प्रतिवक्तुम्," अलीकादिना वा प्रस्थितः सो ऽपि हीयते ॥ ८.५४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The first half of the verse only re-iterates what has been said before,
and it is only the second half that puts forward something new. What had
been said in the first half of the preceding verse is exactly what is
meant by the first half of the present verse.

‘*Who having put forward a statement*,’—having said
something—‘*subsequently retracts*,’—deviates from it, saying

‘I am not sure about the time and place’.........,—ho also fails in his
suit.

Having once ‘*duly*’—with certainty, and clearly—‘*alleged a fact*’,—if,
‘*on being questioned about it*’—what do you means?—By what evidence do
you prove your case?’—if he loses faith in the allegation clearly made
by himself, and proceeds to talk about irrelevant matters, with the
motive that—‘after due investigation I am sure to lose the case, I may
just as well get over a little time,’—then such a person also fails in
his suit.

Or, the term ‘*apadeśa*’ may stand for *fraud*; the meaning being that
if after having set up a fraud, he slinks away from it, saying—‘I have a
severe headache now, I cannot answer any questions,’—or if he opens his
case with false statements,—then also he fails in his suit.—(54)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Praṇihitam*’—‘Duly stated by himself’ (Kullūka and Nandana);—‘stated
by himself in the plaint’ (Govindarāja); ‘duly ascertained’
(Rāghavānanda and Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* which has the following
notes:—‘*Apadiśya*’, having put forward,—‘*apadeśam*’,
pretext,—‘*apadhāvati*’,—retracts,—‘*samyak praṇihitam artham*,’ what
has been stated clearly and definitely,—‘*pṛsṭaḥ*’, questioned as to
what he has to say as against the statement of the other party, or what
proofs he has in support of his own statement;—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 31b), which has the following explanations:—‘He who slinks
away from the court under some pretext’,—‘who does not pay heed—by
answering,—to what has been said by others, even though fully
comprehending what has been said’;—it quotes Medhātithi as reading
‘*adeśam*’ and reproduces his several explanations.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.53-57)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.53].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अपदिश्यापदेशं च, अपदेश्यं वा, पुनर् यस् त्व् अपधावति, अन्यथा ब्रवीति, "अनेन मम हिरण्यं गृहीतम्" इत्य् अपदिश्य पक्षान्तरे पुत्रं भृत्यं वा निर्दिशति, "कस्मिंश्चित् काले देशे वा व्यवहारस् त्वया कृतः" इति यदैवमादि पृच्छ्यते राज्ञा प्राङ्विवाकेन वा तत् सम्यक् पृष्टंनाभिनन्दति, मा भूद् इति विचारणया परमार्थदर्शनम् ॥ ८.५४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

054	Or who having stated what he means to prove afterwards varies (his case), or who being questioned on a fact duly stated by himself does not abide by it;
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/055_asambhAShye_sAxibhish.md">
<details open><summary><h3>055 असम्भाष्ये साक्षिभिश् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

असम्भाष्ये साक्षिभिश् च  
देशे सम्भाषते मिथः ।  
निरुच्यमानं प्रश्नं च  
नेच्छेद् यश् चाऽपि निष्पतेत्  ॥ ८.५५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/055_asambhAShye_sAxibhish.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who secretly converses with the witnesses in a place not fit for conversation, or who does not like the question being investigated, or who falls back;—(55)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

असंभाषणार्हे **देशे** उपह्वरादौ **साक्षिभिः** सह **संभाषत** एकाकी तद्भेदाशङ्कया । **निरुच्यमानं** पृच्छ्यमानं निरूप्यमाणं वा **प्रश्नं** विचारवस्तु **नेच्छति** किंचिद् राजकार्यम् उद्दिश्य राजपुत्रामात्याद्यनुग्रहेण[^२१३] च काललाभं करोति । **यश् चापि निष्पतेत्** । वक्ष्यमाणम् एव क्रियापदं "स हीयते" (म्ध् ८.५६) इति । यद् एवोक्तम् "पुनर् यस् त्व् अपधावति" (म्ध् ८.५४) इति स एवार्थः "यश् चापि निष्पतेत्" इति । पुनर्वचने प्रयोजकम् उक्तम् । अत्यन्तपौनरुक्त्यं[^२१४] मा भूद् इति कश्चिद् विशेष आश्रयितव्यः ॥ ८.५५ ॥


[^२१४]:
     M G: amatyantāpaunaruktyaṃ


[^२१३]:
     M G DK (1: 194): rājaputramānyā-
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*In a place not fit for conversation*’—*i.e*., hidden from
others,—‘*who converses with the witnesses, secretly*’—*i.e*., alone,
for fear of being overheard.

‘*Who does not like the question*,’— the matter under enquiry—‘*being
investigated*’; and on the pretext of some work for the King himself, or
by the favour of the Prince or the Minister, etc., manages to gain
time;—and ‘*who falls back*,’—‘*such* a *person fails*’ is the verbal
phrase to be construed here.

The ‘*falling back*’ mentioned here is the same as the ‘*refracting*’
mentioned before (in verse 51). the purpose of such repetition of the
same idea has already been explained. We have to adopt some such
distinction in order to guard the text against the charge of containing
absolutely needless repetitions.—(55)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (22b), which has the following
notes:—‘*Asambhāṣye*’ ‘in a place where no conversation should be
held,’—‘*niṣpatet*,’ ‘should go away without mentioning his
destination’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 31b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.53-57)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.53].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सभातो ऽन्यत्रोपह्वर एकाकी साक्षिभिः सह **संभाषते मिथः** । असाव् अपि साक्षिभेदाशङ्कया जीयते । साक्षिणश् च पृच्छ्यमानान् नेच्छति, केनचिद् व्याजेन व्यवहारगतेनैव राजतन्त्रानुग्रहप्रदर्शनेन वा साक्षिप्रश्नकाले कार्यान्तरव्यासङ्गेन केनचिद् व्यवहारस्थानान् निष्पतिः, राजोपकारप्रदर्शनेन वेत्य् उक्तम्, यतः "तस्माद् अर्थात् स हीयते" इत्य् एवं वक्ष्यति ॥ ८.५५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

055	Or who converses with the witnesses in a place improper for such conversation; or who declines to answer a question, properly put, or leaves (the court);
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/056_brUhIty_uktash.md">
<details open><summary><h3>056 ब्रूहीत्य् उक्तश् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ब्रूहीत्य् उक्तश् च न ब्रूयाद्  
उक्तं च न विभावयेत् ।  
न च पूर्वापरं विद्यात्  
तस्माद् अर्थात् स हीयते  ॥ ८.५६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/056_brUhIty_uktash.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

—He who, on being ordered to speak, does not speak; or who does not prove what he has asserted;—or who does not grasp the previous and subsequent statements;—such a person fails in that suit.—(50)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तार्थ एव श्लोको ऽयं श्लोकान्तरैर् दृश्यते । पुनर्वचने च प्रयोजनम् उक्तम्- "बहुकृत्वो ऽपि पथ्यं वेदितव्यम्" इति । अक्षरार्थस् त्व् अर्थिना निःशेषिते पूर्वपक्षे प्रतिवादी "ब्रूह्य् अस्मिन् वस्तुनि" इति पृष्टो यदि न ब्रूयात्, पुनः पुनः पृच्छ्यमानो[^२१५] ऽपि । यो हि सम्यग् उत्तराभावान् मिथ्योत्तरवादित्वाद् अमुनैव मे पराजयो भवति तूष्णीभूतस्य तु मे संशय एव पराजये इत्य् अनया बुद्ध्या नोत्तरं ददाति, सो ऽपि जीयते । वक्ष्यति चात्र कालावच्छेदम् "न चेत् त्रिपक्षात् प्रब्रूयात्" (म्ध् ८.५८) इति । सद्यो ह्य् आकृष्टस्य पूर्वपक्षार्थानवबोधाद् उत्तराप्रतिपत्तेर् युक्तं कालहरणम् । अत्र च दिवसैः पञ्चभिर् दशभिर् द्वादशभिर् वा ईषद् ईषद् वदतस् त्रिपक्षसमाप्तिः, न त्व् इयन्तं कालं तूष्णीभाव एव । यश् चातो ऽधिकः कालः, "संस्थितो ऽपि कच्चित् संवत्सरं प्रतीक्षेताप्रतिभावायाम्[^२१६]" (ग्ध् १३.२८) इति, न युक्तम् आदर्तुं यतो ऽप्रतिभा[^२१७] यदि[^२१८] प्रतीक्षाकारणम् सा चेत्[^२१९] संवत्सराद् ऊर्ध्वं भवतीति किम् इत्य् अकारणम् । न चैष नियमः केनचित् प्रकारेणावगम्यते[^२२०] ऽप्रतिभावतः[^२२१] संवत्सरेण प्रतिभा भवतीति । तस्मात् तावन्त्य् एवाहान्य् उपेक्षा युक्ता यावद्भिः पूर्वपक्षार्थावधारणं भवत्य् उत्तरं च प्रतिभाति । एतच् चामुकस्य मन्दधियो ऽप्य् एतावन् मात्रैर् अहोभिर् भवतीति नाधिकं कालम् उपेक्षणीयम् । 


[^२२१]:
     M G: pratibhānavataḥ; DK: 'pratibhānavataḥ


[^२२०]:
     M G: prakāreṇa navagamyate


[^२१९]:
     M G DK (1: 195) omit: cet


[^२१८]:
     M G DK omit: yadi


[^२१७]:
     MG: 'pratibhāve


[^२१६]:
     M G: -bhāvayed


[^२१५]:
     M G: pṛcchyamāne

- पूर्वपाक्षिकस्य तु तद् अहर् एव स्वार्थविनिवेशनं युक्तम् । यत इदम् एष मे धारयतीदं वानेन ममापकृतम् इति निश्चितं तस्य भवति । स्वेच्छया ह्य् असौ प्रवर्तते । केवलं तस्मै स्वपक्षम् आवेदयते किम् इत्य् अनिश्चितः स्वार्थो भवति । उत्तरपाक्षिकस् त्व् अविदितसंबन्धस् तदानीम् एव राजपुरुषैर् आनीयमानः कथम् इव स्वपरपक्षौ निश्चिनुयात् । पक्षद्वयनिरूपणं हि तद् अस्य तदानीम् एवापतति । नान्यथोत्तरपाक्षिको भवति । तस्मात् पूर्वपाक्षिकस्य साध्ये वस्तुनि तदहःपूर्वपक्षसमाप्तिर् द्विदिवसलाभो वा । उभाव् अपि चैतौ पक्षौ स्मृत्यन्तरपरिगृहीतौ । तथा ह्य् आह-

- सुनिश्चितबलाधानः पूर्वपक्षी भवेत् सदा ।

- दशाहं द्वादशाहं वा स्वपक्षं परिशोधयेत् ॥ इति ।

तथेदम् अपरम् "ततो ऽर्थी लेखयेत् सद्यः प्रतिज्ञातार्थसाधनम्" (य्ध् २.७) ।

- या तु संवत्सरपरीक्षा सा मूलासंभवाद् अप्रमाणम् । न हि व्यवहारस्मृताव् अष्टकादिवद् वेदमूलता शक्यते वक्तुम्, अकार्यरूपत्वाद् अर्थस्य । प्रमाणान्तरविषयत्वे च तदसंभवः प्रतिपादितः । 

- एषापि त्रिपक्षोपेक्षा न सर्वत्र । यत् उक्तम्-

- साहसस्तेयपारुष्यगोऽभिशापात्यये स्त्रियाम् ।

- विवादयेत् सद्य एव कालो ऽन्यत्रेच्छया स्मृतः ॥ इति । (य्ध् २.१२)

- साहसादौ हि चिरम् उपेक्ष्यमाणे ऽपरम् आराध्नुयात्[^२२२] । अतः सद्यो विवादो विधीयते । न चात्रास्मृत्यादयो[^२२३] ऽनुक्तहेतवः संभवन्ति । साहसादिकारणं हि तदानीम् एव राजानं वेदयेत् । तीव्रसंवेगता हि तत्र भवति । वस्त्राद्यपहारेण[^२२४] तदुपेक्षायां रागशङ्का[^२२५] भवति । साक्षिणस् तत्र यदृच्छया संनिहिता अपि भवन्ति । ते हि देशान्तरं गता नमजात्यादिभिर् न विज्ञायन्ते । ततः स्वाभाविकप्रमाणाभावः ।


[^२२५]:
     M G DK: nāśāśaṅkṣā


[^२२४]:
     M G DK: vastrādyupahāreṇa


[^२२३]:
     M G DK: cātra smṛtyādayo


[^२२२]:
     M G: aparādhnuyāt

- किं च ऋणादानादिषु कदाचिद् इतरेतरं संदधते । न तत्र राज्ञो हस्तप्रक्षेपः । प्रायेण[^२२६] च संशुद्धौ नानुस्मृतिर्[^२२७] उपयुज्यते तदा कियद् दत्तम् इति । साहसकारी तु राज्ञावश्यं निग्रहीतव्य इतरेण संधीयमानो ऽपि । तस्माद् ऋणादिषु कालहरणं साहसादिषु सद्य इति स्थितम् । तद् उक्तम्-


[^२२७]:
     M G DK: smṛtir


[^२२६]:
     M G DK: krameṇa

- गहनत्वाद् विवादानाम् असामर्थ्यात् स्मृतेर् अपि ।

- ऋणादिषु हरेत् कालं कामं तत्त्वबुभुत्सया ॥ (न्स्म् मा १.३८)

यदा संकुलः पूर्वपक्षो भवति तदा गहनत्वान् न शक्यते ग्रहीतुम् । अनाकुलो विलुप्तक्रमो ऽपि गृहीतः प्रतिवचनकाले महत्वान् न शक्यते सर्वेण स्मर्तुम् इति स्मृत्यन्तरस्यार्थः । 

**उक्तं च न विभावयेत्** । साध्यं वस्तु निर्दिश्य न साधयति साधनस्याभावात्, विपक्षे वा भावात् । **न च पूर्वापरं विद्यात्** । उक्तम् एतत् । **तस्माद्** **अर्थाद्** व्यवहारवस्तुनः **स हीयते** पराजितो भवतीत्य् अर्थः ॥ ८.५६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse is found to state what has been already mentioned in the
foregoing verses. The use of such repetitions has been already explained
on the ground that wholesome advice should be repeatedly driven home.

The meaning of the words of the text is as follows:—The plaint having
been filed and duly expounded by the complainant, when the defendant is
asked to make his statement regarding the matter of the plaint, if he
does not make a statement, even though repeatedly asked to do so;
*i.e*., he who, having no proper answer to make, does not give any
answer at all, thinking that if ho gave an unsuitable reply, his defeat
would be certain, whereas if he kept quiet, it would be doubtful, also
fails in his suit.

The time-limit in connection with the filing of the answer is going to
be laid down (under 58)—‘If he does not file the answer within *three
fortnights, etc*.’ When the man is suddenly dragged to the court, since
he does not know what the complaint against him is, he cannot find the
right answer at once, and hence it is only right to grant a
postponement, but when the law fixes the time-limit being fixed at
‘three fortnights,’ what is meant is that so many days are to be granted
to the defendant, who proceeds to file portions of his answer within
five, ten or twelve days,—and not that he is to keep absolute silence
for such a long time. As for the law that allows of more time,—*e.g*.,
in the text ‘In some cases he may wait for one year, when there is
non-understanding’ (*Gautama*, 13.28),—this should not be followed in
practice; because if ‘non-understanding’ is sufficient cause for delay,
why should it cease to be so after the lapse of one year only? Nor can
there be any certainty as to the man, who does not grasp the plaint
during one year, being able to grasp it after that time. Hence the
postponement granted should he just for that period of time which may he
regarded as a fair interval for the understanding of the suit and the
finding of the answer. So that no more time shall be granted than what
may be considered sufficient for a man of oven dull intelligence for the
said purpose.

As regards the plaintiff, it is only right that he should file his
plaint on the same day (that he presents himself before the Court); as
he already knows that ‘such and such a man owes me such an amount,’ or
that ‘such and such a man has done me this wrong’; and he takes action
also entirely upon his own choice. So that when the man is setting forth
his own case, why should he have a doubt upon any point (for the
clearing of which he should need time)?

As for the defendant, on the other hand, he does not know anything about
the complaint, when he is suddenly hauled up by the King’s officers; how
then can he have any definite notion regarding either the plaint or the
answer? He is in fact called upon to understand the plaint and find its
answer at the spur of the moment; otherwise he would not be a
‘defendant’ at all.

Thus then, for the Plaintiff, it is necessary to complete his plaint, in
regard to the case he has to prove, on the same day; or he may be
granted two or three days. Both these views have been accepted by other
*Smṛtis*:—*e.g*. (*a*) ‘The complaint should be always prepared with a
definite idea of the ease and its proofs,’ and again: ‘He may strengthen
his case for ten or twelve days’; and (*b*) ‘The plaintiff shall
immediately set forth his case in writing’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*,
7).

As for the view that ‘postponement may be granted for one year,’ there
is no authority for it, and as such it cannot be accepted. We cannot
always assume the presence of Vedic texts corroborative of such
Smṛti-texts as bear upon judicial proceedings,—in the same manner as we
do in the case of the *Smṛti* texts dealing with the *Aṣṭakā* -offering;
because the judicial proceeding is not of the nature of an *act* to be
done. In fact, we have already shown that such assumption is not
possible in the case of matters amenable to other moans of knowledge
(than verbal authority).

This postponement of the complaint is not to be granted in all cases;
since it has been laid down that—‘In the case of heinous crimes, of
theft, of assault, of charges in connection with cows, of wrong done to
the life and property of women, the defendant should be made to answer
the charge at once; in other cases the time has been declared to be
allowable according to the wish of the Court’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*,
12). In the case of heinous crimes and the rest, if a long postponement
were granted, then, during the interval, the defendant might propitiate
the other party. It is for this reason that *immediate answer* has been
required. Specially as in such cases, there can be no lapse of memory or
other causes that would justify the postponement of the answer; because
as a rule charges of heinous crimes are laid before the King
immediately, for the simple reason that in such oases there is great
urgency. For instance, in the case of the theft of clothes, there is
always the chance of its former colour being altered during the
interval. Then again, in such cases such witnesses as may have happened
to be present by chance would he immediately available, while (if
postponement were granted) they would have gone to other places, and, as
their name and caste, etc., would not he known, they could not be traced
and found. So that there would naturally be absence of requisite proof.

Further, in the case of non-payment of debt and other matters, the
parties may settle it between themselves, in which the King cannot
interfere; for when the case has been amicably settled, it is no
business of the King’s to enquire how much of the claim has been paid.
As for the criminal, on the other hand, it is the duty of the King to
punish him, even though he may have come to terms with the plaintiff.
For these reasons, the conclusion is that there shall he postponement
only in the case of non-payment of debt and such cases, while in the
case of crime, etc., immediate answer shall be demanded. To this end wo
have the following declaration—‘In the case of non-payment of debt,
etc., postponement may he granted, for the purpose of finding out the
truth, as disputes on such matters are intricate, and there is
possibility of the defendant being incapable of supplying the answer at
once, or of his having forgotten the facts of the case’;—and the meaning
of this *Smṛti* text is that in a case, where the plaint happens to be
an intricate one, it is only natural that being so intricate, it cannot
he grasped Jut the spur of the moment,—and every one cannot remember,
after the lapse of a long time, all the details clearly and in the
correct order, in order to be able to offor a suitable answer.

‘*And does not prove what he has asserted*,’—*i.e*., having put forward
the case he has to prove, he fails to establish it, because he has no
proofs, and not because he has no opponent (against whom he would have
to establish it).

‘*Who does not grasp the precious and subsequent statements*’;—this has
been already explained (under 53).

For the said reasons, the person fails in the matter of the suit;
*i.e*., is defeated.—(56)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Pūrvāparam*’—‘The plaint and its answer’ (Medhātithi);—‘the proof and
the matter to be proved’ (Kullūka);—‘what should be said first and what
afterwards’ (Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (22b) which says that
‘*brūhi*’, ‘speak out’ has to he reiterated for the sake of
firmness;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 31b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.53-57)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.53].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**ब्रूहीत्य् उक्तश् च न ब्रूयात्** प्रतिपादनकाले पराभव[भीत्या नोत्तरं ददाति । **उक्तं च न वि**]**भावयेत्** साक्षिभिः, अभावाद् वा तेषां विवक्षासम्यग्दर्शनाद् वा । **न च पूर्वापरं विद्यात्**- साक्षिगतम् अन्यत्र व्यवहारगतम् उक्तम् एव । **तस्माद् अर्थात् स हीयते** ॥ ८.५६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

056	Or who, being ordered to speak, does not answer, or does not prove what he has alleged; or who does not know what is the first (point), and what the second, fails in his suit.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/057_sAxiNaH_santi.md">
<details open><summary><h3>057 साक्षिणः सन्ति ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

साक्षिणः सन्ति मेत्य् उक्त्वा  
दिशेत्य् उक्तो दिशेन् न यः [मेधातिथिपाठः - ज्ञातारः सन्ति मेत्य्*]  
*{मेत्य् &lt; म इत्य् ?} ।  
धर्मस्थः कारणैर् एतैर्  
हीनं तम् अपि निर्दिशेत् [मेधातिथिपाठः - तम् इति निर्दिशेत्  ॥ ८.५७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/057_sAxiNaH_santi.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having asserted that he has witnesses, and on being asked to name them, if he does not name them,—him also, on these grounds, the judge shall declare to have failed in his suit.—(57)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**ज्ञातारः** साक्षिणः पुरुषा **मम सन्तीत्य् उक्त्वा** यदोच्यते कथ्यताम् इति तदा तूष्णीक आस्ते — न तान् देशनामजातिभिर् विशेषणैः कथयति — तदा **एतैः** प्रयेकं पूर्वम् उक्तैः **कारणैर्** इह **हीनो ऽसौ** व्यवहाराद् भ्रष्ट इति । **धर्मस्थो** धर्माधिकरणस्थः प्राड्विवाको **निर्दिशेन्** निश्चितं ब्रूयाज् जितो ऽयम् इति । यथैव विपक्षबाधकप्रमाणावृत्त्या[^२२८] पराजय एवं स्वपक्षसाधनाभावाद्[^२२९] अपि । अभावनिश्चयश् च पुनः पुनर् अवसरे ऽनुपन्यासात् कारणान्तरस्य चानुपन्यासे ऽभावाद् इति । 


[^२२९]:
     M G: svapakṣe sādhanābhāvād


[^२२८]:
     M G: vipakṣabādhakaṃ pramāṇavṛttyā

**ज्ञातार** इति तृन्नन्तम् एव । तत्रेदम् इति द्वितीयान्तं युज्यते, "खलर्थत्ट्नाम्" (पाण् २.३.६९) इति षष्ठीनिषेधात् । **हीनं तम्** इति द्वितीयान्तः पाठः । **इति**शब्दः प्रकारार्थो द्रष्टव्यः । एभिर् उक्तैः प्रकारैर् अन्यैश् चैवंविधैर् **हीनं तन् निर्दिशेत्** । यदा तु वाक्यार्थपरामर्शः तदा हीनो ऽसाव् इति पाठः । वाक्यार्थस्य कर्मत्वाद् द्वितीयाया अभावः । 


एते पराजयहेतवः । न त्व् आकारेङ्गितादिवद् व्यभिचारिणः[^२३०] । यो हि पुनः पुनर् विचारावसरे न संनिधीयते संनिहितो नोत्तरं प्रतिवक्ति[^२३१] तत्र निश्चितम् इदं भवति नास्य जयहेतुर् अस्तीति । यदि च सर्वदैवानुत्तरवादिनं न पराजयेद् राजा ततो व्यवस्थाभङ्ग आपद्यते । पौर्वापर्यानवबोधस्[^२३२] त्व् इङ्गितादिवद् द्रष्टव्यः । यः सर्वकालं वाग्मी प्रगल्भं प्रतिपत्तिमांस् तस्येङ्गितादयो ऽन्यथाभवन्तः पराजयहेतौ प्रमाणान्तरेणानिश्चिते ऽपि लिङ्गदर्शनस्थानीया उपोद्बलका भवन्ति ॥ ८.५७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*jñātāraḥ*’ stands for *witnesses*. Having said that ‘I have
witnesses,’ he is ordered—‘name them’; thereupon, if he does not name
them, indicating their residence, name and caste;—then, on each of the
above-mentioned grounds, he should be regarded as having failed.

‘*Dharmasthaḥ*’ is one who has been appointed to try cases,—the Judge;
and he should pronounce him to have failed, saying ‘this man is
non-suited.’

Just as one loses his case by the other party adducing proofs
establishing the contrary of his contention, so does he lose it also by
the absence of proofs in support of it; and this absence of proofs is
ascertained by the fact of their not being adduced by the party at the
right time, even though repeatedly asked to do so,—as also by the
adducing of proofs to the contrary.

‘*Jñātāraḥ*’ ends in the ‘*tṛn*’ affix; and as such it should govern a
noun in the Accusative case, the use of the Genitive being precluded by
Pāṇini, 2.3.69.

The right reading being ‘*hīnam tam*’—the particle ‘*iṭi*’ should be
taken as denoting *kind*;—the sense being—‘on these, and on other
similar grounds, the Judge shall declare him to have failed’;—if, on the
other hand, the particle ‘*iti*’ he taken as referring to the whole
sentence, then the correct reading would he ‘*hīno’-sau*’; because the
whole sentence being the object of the verb, there would be nothing to
justify the use of the Accusative ending (in ‘*hīnam tam*’).

These grounds of defeat are infallible, unlike the aspect, gestures,
etc. (of the parties), which are fallible.

If at the time of the enquiry, a party does not present himself,—or oven
though presenting himself, does not offer any answer,—then it becomes
certain that there are ne grounds for the man succeeding in his suit. If
the King were not to non-suit the party who never offers an answer, then
the entire judicial machinery would become upset.

As regards the man not perceiving the inconsistency between his first
and subsequent statements,—this has to be treated on the same footing as
*gesture* and other indicative signs. In the case of a man who
throughout is very talkative and bold and clever, gestures and other
indicatives are not infallible guides; and being similar to indirect
verbal indicatives, they are only regarded as corrobarative of the
decision regarding defeat or victory taken on other grounds.—(57)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (22b), which explains
‘*dharmasthaḥ*’ as ‘one who is occupying the judgment seat’;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 31b), which explains the construction
as—‘*mā*,’ *mām*, ‘*gnātāraḥ*,’ persons knowing that what I state is
true, &c., &c., as being, according to Medhātithi, but goes on to add,
that according to the Ācārya,’ ‘*meti*’stands for ‘*me-iti*,’ the
*sandhi* being explained as a Vedic anomaly. It notes the reading,
‘*Santi jñātāra ityuktvā*,’ as found in *Kalpataru*, but rejects it as
an unauthorised reading.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.53-57)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.53].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सर्वथा साक्षिभ्यो ऽन्यैः प्रेतिज्ञातार्थप्रतिपादकैः **कारणैर्** अविभाव्यमाने वस्तुनि । साक्षिणः शरण् । । । [कार]णैर् यथोक्तैर् असत्प्रत्ययवचनैर् **हीनम् इत्य्** एव **निर्दिशेत्** । अर्थिनम् इतरं वा, उभयतः संभवात् पराजयहेतूनाम् । **धर्मस्थः करणैर् एतैर् हीनं तम् इति** पराजयकारणं विज्ञेयम् । इतिकरणं चैवंशब्दार्थे । तथा च व्याख्यातम् । इदानीम् अर्थिप्रत्यर्थिनोर् वचनकालनियमार्थम् इदम् आरभ्यते ॥ ८.५७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

057	Him also who says 'I have witnesses,' and, being ordered to produce them, produces them not, the judge must on these (same) grounds declare to be non-suited.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/058_abhiyoktA_na.md">
<details open><summary><h3>058 अभियोक्ता न ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अभियोक्ता न चेद् ब्रूयाद्  
बध्यो दण्ड्यश् च धर्मतः [मेधातिथिपाठः - बन्ध्यो दण्ड्यश् च] ।  
न चेत् त्रिपक्षात् प्रब्रूयाद्  
धर्मं प्रति पराजितः  ॥ ८.५८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/058_abhiyoktA_na.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the complainant does not speak out, he shall be imprisoned and pined, according to law. If the other party does not answer within three fortnights, he becomes defeated according to law.—(58)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अभियोक्ता** अर्थी राज्ञान्तिकं कंचन[^२३४] पुरुषम् आहूय यदि व्यवहारपदं न कथयति, तदा निष्प्रयोजनाद् **बध्यो**[^२३५] **दण्ड्यश्** **च** । दण्डबन्धने दण्डपरिमाणे च गुणवत्तां प्रत्यर्थिन आह्वानेन च हानिम् अपेक्ष्य कल्पनीयानि । अतस् तदहर् एवार्थिना विवदितव्यम् । प्रत्यर्थी तु **न चेत् त्रिपक्षाद् ब्रूयाद्** इत्य् अर्थः — तदा नासौ दण्ड्यो बन्धयितव्यो वा । किं तर्हीयता कालेनोत्तरे सत्य् अपराजित एव । **धर्मं प्रति** । धर्मत एवायं पराजयो न छलम् इत्य् अर्थः । **त्रिपक्षाद्** इति पात्रादिषु द्रष्टव्यस् तेनेकाराभावः । अर्थतत्त्वम् अस्य लोकस्यास्माभिः प्राङ् निरूपितम् ॥ ८.५८ ॥


[^२३५]:
     J: bandhyo


[^२३४]:
     M G DK: ca
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If the ‘*complainant*’—plaintiff—having gone to the King, and on getting
the other party summoned,—does not state his case, then, on account of
haring done all this needlessly, ‘*he shall be imprisoned and fined*’;
whether the punishment shall be imprisonment or fine, and what shall be
the exact period and amount of these, should he determined in accordance
with the nature of the case and the loss entailed upon the other party
on account of being summoned. For this reason it is necessary for the
complainant to state his case on the same day.

As for the defendant, ‘*if he does not answer within three
fortnights*,’—then he shall not be either imprisoned or fined; in fact,
if he does not answer the charge within the time, he loses the case.

‘*According to law*’;—such defeat would be quite legal, and not illegal.

‘*Within three fortnights*’;............ (?)

The real meaning of this verse has been explained by us above (under
verse 56).—(58)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (22b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (2.2).—‘Tho defendant, immediately after having become
acquainted with the plaint, shall write down his answer, which must
correspond to the tenour of the plaint; or, let him deliver his answer
on the next day, or in three days, or in seven days.’

*Bṛhaspati* (4.1-6).—‘When the plaint has been well-defined, a clear
exposition given of what is claimed and what not, and the meaning of the
plaint fully established, the judge shall cause the answer to be
submitted by the defendant. If the defendant does not make an answer
fully meeting the contents of the plaint, he shall be compelled to pay
by gentle remonstrance and other methods;—kindly speeches constitute
*gentle remonstrance*, intimidation is *pointing out danger*.’ *Force*
consists of depriving one of his property, or striking or confining him.
When a man makes no answer, even though all methods have been employed,
he is defeated and liable to punishment after a week. When the defendant
asks for time, through timidity or terror or failing memory, time shall
be granted to him. He shall bo allowed time extending to one day, or
three days, or five days, or seven days, or a fortnight, or a month, or
three seasons, or a year, according to his circumstances.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**अभियोक्ता न चेद् ब्रूयात्**, न लेखयेद् व्यवहारं राज्ञः स्वकार्यनिर्वेदनानन्तरम् एव । तत्रायं बन्धनार्हो दण्डार्हश् च स्यात् । गुणवद्व्यवहारवस्त्वपक्षया चैतयोर् नियोगविकल्पसमुच्चयाः प्रकल्प्याः । **च**शब्दाद् ब्(व्?)अधदण्डवाग्दण्डयोर् अपि यथोक्तसामर्थ्याद् । अत्र संहवो विज्ञेयो गुणान् अतिक्रमेण धर्मतः पराजितस्य सोपधत्वात् कारणान्तरतः, येन सुविहितार्थेन ह्य् अर्थिना भवितव्यम् । अथ केनचित् प्रमाकरणान्तरेणायम् अकुटिलो निरुपधत्वाद् विज्ञायते । अतो नायं ब् (व्?)अधदण्डादिः पदार्थः स्यात् । तथा चोक्तम्, **धर्मं प्रतिपराजितस्य** नान्यथा प्रत्यर्थिनः । इदानीम् अर्थिकालाद् अन्यः प्रतिवचनकालो निर्दिश्यते । **न चेत् त्रिपक्षात् प्रब्रूयात्** प्रतिब्रूयाद् इत्य् अर्थः । अतो **बध्यो दण्डश् च धर्मतो, धर्मं प्रति पराजितः सन्**, नेतरथेत्य् उक्तम् । अधुना जितस्यार्थिनः प्रत्यर्थिनो वा दण्डनियमार्थम् अयम् आरभ्यते श्लोकः ॥ ८.५८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

058	If a plaintiff does not speak, he may be punished corporally or fined according to the law; if (a defendant) does not plead within three fortnights, he has lost his cause.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/059_yo_yAvan.md">
<details open><summary><h3>059 यो यावन् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यो यावन् निह्नुवीताऽर्थं  
मिथ्या यावति वा वदेत् ।  
तौ नृपेण ह्य् अधर्मज्ञौ  
दाप्यो तद्द्विगुणं दमम्  ॥ ८.५९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/059_yo_yAvan.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If one falsely denies a debt, or if the other falsely demands it,—these two, proficient in dishonesty, should be made by the king to pay a fine double that sum.—(59)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

येन पञ्चसहस्राणि दत्तानीति प्रमाणान्तरान् निश्चितम् — लेख्यादौ तु करणे दश[^२३६] समारोपितानि — प्रमाणान्तरं संवत्सराख्यम् इति निश्चित्येदम् अपश्यत् केवलेन लेख्यप्रमाणेन सर्वत्र प्रवर्तमानः — छलव्यवहारीति[^२३७] द्विगुणं दण्ड्यः[^२३८] । यस्य तु विस्मृत्याप्य् अन्यथाप्रवृत्तिर् आशङ्क्यते तस्य दशकं शतम् । एवम् इतरस्यापि । न तु सर्वापह्नवे दशभाग एकदेशापह्नवे द्विगुणम् इति । किं तु शाठ्याद् अन्यथाप्रतिपद्यमानौ द्विगुणं दण्ड्यौ । विस्मृतिदारिद्र्याभ्यां दण्डम् उत्तरम् । **यो यावन्तम् अर्थम् अपह्नुवीत** अपजानीते ऽधर्मर्णः — **मिथ्या यावति**[^२३९] विपरीतं धनं **वदेद्** उत्तर्मर्णः — तावत् ताव् उत्तमर्णाधमर्णाव् **अधर्मज्ञौ** । **द्विगुणं दमम्** । **तद्** इत्य् अपह्नूयमानधनपरामर्शः । यावद् अपह्नुतं ततो द्विगुणं दमो दण्डः । **अधर्मज्ञ**ग्रहणाच् च लिङ्गान् निश्चितछलविषयो ऽयं दण्ड इत्य् उक्तम् ॥ ८.५९ ॥


[^२३९]:
     M G: yācati


[^२३८]:
     M G: daṇḍyam


[^२३७]:
     M G: pravartamānachalavyavahārīti


[^२३६]:
     M G: deśa
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In a case where on the strength of other proofs it has boon decided that
the creditor had lent only 5,000, while the sum entered in the document
is 10,000; from this it is understood that, the creditor has been
dishonest in his dealings, having thought that, as other kinds of
evidence would be admissible only for one year, he would get what he
would prove by moans of the documentary evidence only; and being found
to be dishonest, he should ho fined double the amount. But in a case
where there may he a doubt as to whether the fraud had been committed
intentionally, or only through carelessness, the fine shall be only ten
per cent.

Similarly in the case of the defendant also. It is not that if he denies
the whole claim, the tine shall be ten per cent, and if he denies it
only partly, then double the amount. As a matter of fact, when they are
found to be dealing dishonestly, they shall he fined double the amount;
while if their behaviour is found to be due to either negligence or
poverty, the fine shall be only ten per cent.

When ‘*one*’—*i.e*., the debtor—‘*denies the debt*,’ and when the other,
*i.e*., the creditor—‘*falsely*’—dishonestly—demands it;—then both
these, the creditor as well as the debtor would be ‘*proficient in
dishonesty*,’ and should be fined ‘*double the sum*’;—‘the sum’ standing
for what is denied; so that the sense is that the fine shall be double
the sum that was denied.

The addition of the term ‘*proficient in dishonesty*’ indicates that the
penalty is imposed for proved dishonesty.—(59)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Verses 59-61 are not omitted by Medhātithi, as wrongly asserted by
Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 77), which adds the
following explanation:—When the defendant, through dishonest motives,
denies the claim,—or when the plaintiff prefers a false claim,—both
those are dishonest dealers, and they should be punished with a fine,
which is the double of the amount of the claim;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p.
34), which says that this rule refers to cases where the culprit is very
wealthy;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (80b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 77).—‘He who makes a false claim should be
made to pay twice the value of the claim.’

*Yama* (Do., p. 78).—‘If the debtor, even though possessed of the
requisite means, does not repay the debt, through dishonesty, he should
be compelled by the King to pay, having realised from him double of his
debt.’

*Nārada* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 78).—‘If the debtor, even though possessed
of the requisite means, does not repay the debt, through dishonesty, he
should be compelled by the King to repay, after taking from him the
twentieth part of the claim as fine.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.11).—‘If a party makes a false statement, and the other
party proves it to he so, then the former shall pay to the King a fine
equal to the amount of the claim. The man who makes a false claim shall
pay to the King a fine equal to double the amount of the claim.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **यो यावन् निह्नुवीतार्थं मिथ्या यावति वा वदेत् ।**

अर्थी प्रत्यर्थी वा ।

> **तौ नृपेण ह्य् अधर्मज्ञौ दाप्यौ तद्द्विगुणं दमम्  ॥ ८.५९ ॥**

तस्माद् अपह्नुताद् अभियोगाच् च मिथ्याभियोक्तारं निह्नवकं च सोपदेशं [यत्] किंचित् प्रतिपद्यमानं तद्द्विगुणं दापयेत् । साक्ष्युपलक्षणार्थम् इदं प्रकरणम् अधुनोच्यते ॥ ८.५९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

059	In the double of that sum which (a defendant) falsely denies or on which (the plaintiff) falsely declares, shall those two (men) offending against justice be fined by the king.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/060_pRShTo.apavyayamAnas.md">
<details open><summary><h3>060 पृष्टो ऽपव्ययमानस् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पृष्टो ऽपव्ययमानस् तु  
कृतावस्थो धनैषिणा ।  
त्र्यवरैः साक्षिभिर् भाव्यो  
नृप-ब्राह्मणसंनिधौ  ॥ ८.६० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/060_pRShTo.apavyayamAnas.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

On having been summoned and questioned, if one denies it,—then he siiall be convicted by the man seeking for his due by means of at least three witnesses, in the presence of the king and the brāhmaṇas.—(60)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यः **कृतावस्थ** आहूतो ऽभियुक्तो गृहीतप्रतिभूश् च राजसकाशे प्राड्विवाकेनान्यैर् वा पृच्छ्यते किम् अस्मै धारयसि नेति **पृष्ठः** सन्न् **अपव्ययते** ऽपह्नुते[^२४०] । **धनैषिणा** स्वधनं पूर्वप्रयुक्तम् आत्मनः साधयितुम् इच्छता । **साक्षिभिर् भाव्यो** विप्रतिपन्नः प्रतिपादयितव्यः । **त्र्यवरैः** । त्रय अवरे येषां तैस् त्र्यवरैः । अवरम् अपचयातिशयम् आह । यद्य् अत्यन्तं न्यूनास् तदा त्रयः स्युः । अन्यथा त्रिभ्य ऊर्ध्वम् । **नृपब्राह्मणसंनिधाव्** इति । 


[^२४०]:
     M G DK (1:254) add: hnuvāno

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च तेषाम् एव यैर् न्यायः प्रारब्धस् तत्र तत्संनिधान एव साक्षिप्रश्नः प्राप्तः । किम् अनेन **नृपब्राह्मणसंनिधाव्** इति । 

<u>नैवम्</u> । प्रमाणपुरुषप्रेषणेनापि साक्षिप्रश्न उपपद्यत इति । साक्षात् प्रष्टव्य इति पुनर्वचनम् ॥ ८.६० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Being ‘*summoned*’— called, complained against, and let off on
security,—‘*and questioned*’— in the presence of the King, either by the
judge or by other members of the Court—‘Do you, or do you not, owe this
amount to this person?’—if the man denies it; ‘*then he shall he c*
*onv* *icted*,’—proved to be wrong—‘*by* *the man seeking for his
due*’—*i.e*., by the person who is desirous of proving that the sum had
been really lent by him,—‘by *means of at least three witnesses*’;—the
compound ‘*tryavara*’ means ‘*of whom three is the least number*,’ the
term ‘*avara*’ standing for the minimum; the meaning being that if they
are to be fewest, they should he *three*; otherwise they should he more
than three;—*in the presence of the King and the Brāhmaṇas*.’

An objection is raised:—“The witnesses are naturally to be questioned
before the persons by whom the case has begun to be tried; why then
should it ho asserted that this has to be done *in the* *presence* *of
the King and the Brāhmaṇas*?”

There is no force in this. It is just possible that the witnesses might
be questioned by deputing a trustworthy person to go to them; hence with
a view to emphasise that the witnesses should be questioned personally
by the trying persons, it has been reiterated here.—(60)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (2.26).—‘When the defendant denies the claim, the plaintiff has
to prove his claim, unless the denial should have been in the form of a
*special plea*. What the plaintiff has fully stated in the plaint, that
he must substantiate by adducing evidence at the third stage of the
trial.’

*Nārada* (1.147 (?)).—‘In doubtful cases, when two parties are
quarrelling with one another, the truth has to be gathered from
witnesses, whose knowledge is based on what has been seen, heard or
understood by them.’

*Bṛhaspati* (5.1-3).—‘When litigants are quarrelling in a court of
justice, the Judges, after examining the answer, shall adjudge the
burden of proof to either of the two parties. The Judges............
having determined to which party the burden of proof shall be adjudged,
that person shall substantiate the whole of his declaration by documents
or other proofs. The plaintiff shall prove his declaration, and the
defendant his special plea.’

*Āpastamba* (2.29.7).—‘The witness shall answer the questions put to
him, according to the truth, in the morning, before a kindled fire,
standing near water, in the presence of the King, with the consent of
all, after having been exhorted by the Judges to be fair to both sides.’

*Gautama* (13.1).—‘In disputed cases the truth shall be established by
means of witnesses.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.69). ‘Witnesses should be at least three.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एकस्य साक्षित्व प्रतिषेधाद् द्वयोर् अपि साक्षित्वं त्रित्वापवादाद् भविष्यति, अन् केवलं त्रयाणाम् ॥ ८.६० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

060	(A defendant) who, being brought (into court) by the creditor, (and) being questioned, denies (the debt), shall be convicted (of his falsehood) by at least three witnesses (who must depose) in the presence of the Brahmana (appointed by) the king.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/061_yAdRshA_dhanibhiH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>061 यादृशा धनिभिः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यादृशा धनिभिः कार्या  
व्यवहारेषु साक्षिणः ।  
तादृशान् संप्रवक्ष्यामि  
यथा वाच्यम् ऋतं च तैः  ॥ ८.६१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/061_yAdRshA_dhanibhiH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

I shall declare now what sort of persons should be made witnesses in suits by wealthy men, and how the truth should be told by them.—(61)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

साक्षिलक्षणोपन्यासः श्लोकः । **यादृशाः साक्षिणो** यज्जातीया यद्गुणयुक्ताश् च **धनिभिर्** उत्तमर्णैर् **व्यवहारेषु** धनप्रयोगादिषु **कर्तव्यास्** **तादृशान्** वक्ष्यमाणेन कथयिष्यामि । **यथा** च ऋतं सत्यं[^२४१] **वाच्यं** वक्तव्यं पृष्टैः सद्भिस् तैः, पूर्वाह्ण इत्यादि, तम् अपि प्रकारं वक्ष्यामीति ॥ ८.६१ ॥


[^२४१]:
     M G DK (1: 251) omit: ṛtaṃ satyaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The verse introduces the section dealing with witnesses.

‘*What sort of persons*’—*i.e*., of what, castes and with what
qualifications.

‘*Wealthy men*’—creditors.

^(‘)*Suits*’—dealing with money-transactions.

I shall describe now what sorts of witnesses shall he adduced; and also
how the truth should be told by them, when questioned,—this also I shall
explain.—(61)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 256);—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 173).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.61-63)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (1-19.13).—‘Men of the four castes who have sons may be
witnesses, excepting *Śṛotriyas*, the King, ascetics and those destitute
of human intelligence.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.8).—‘Descendants of a noble race, who are virtuous and
wealthy, sacrifices, zealous in the practice of religious austerities,
having male issue, well versed in the holy law, studious, veracious,
acquainted with the three Vedas and aged—shall be witnesses.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.68.69).—‘Persons devoted to austerities, charitable, of
noble families, veracious, heedful of righteousness, straightforward,
with sons, wealthy, devoted to acts prescribed in the Śruti and in
Smṛtis;—such persons shall be witnesses;—they shall be at least three in
number; the caste of the witnesses being consonant with the caste of the
parties; or members of all castes may be witnesses for all eases.’

*Bṛhaspati* (7.16).—‘There should be nine, seven, five, four or three
witnesses; or two only, if they are learned Brāhmaṇas, are proper; but
let him never examine an only witness.’

*Gautama* (13.2.3).—‘Witnesses shall be many, faultless as regards the
performance of their duties, worthy to be trusted by the King, and free
from affection for, or hatred against, either party;—they may be even
Śūdras.’

*Bṛhaspati* (7.28),—‘Those may be witnesses who are in the habit of
performing religious acts enjoined in the Vedas and Smṛtis, free from
covetousness and malice, of respectable parentage, irreproachable,
zealous in austerities, liberal and sympathetic.’

*Āpastamba* (2.29.7).—‘A person possessed of good qualities may be
called as a witness, and he shall, answer the questions.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.28).—‘Śrotriyas, men of unblemished form, of good
character, men who are holy and love truth, are fit to be witnesses;—or
men of any caste may give evidence regarding men of any other caste.’

*Nārada* (1.153-154).—‘The witnesses shall be of honourable family,
straightforward and unexceptionable as to their descent, their actions
and their fortunes. They shall not be less than three in number,
unimpeachable, honest and pure-minded. They shall be Brāhmaṇas,
Kṣatriyas or Vaiśyas or irreproachable Śūdras. Each of these shall be
witness for his own order; or all of them may be witnesses for all.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

धनव्यवहारे च साक्षिणां लक्षणम् उच्यमानम्, अन्येष्व् अपि व्यवहारेषु कार्यसामान्याद् अविरोधाच् चेत्थंभूता एव प्रतीयेरन् ॥ ८.६१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

061	I will fully declare what kind of men may be made witnesses in suits by creditors, and in what manner those (witnesses) must give true (evidence).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/062_gRhiNaH_putriNo.md">
<details open><summary><h3>062 गृहिणः पुत्रिणो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

गृहिणः पुत्रिणो मौलाः  
क्षत्र-विश्-शूद्र-योनयः ।  
अर्थ्युक्ताः साक्ष्यम् अर्हन्ति  
न ये के चिद् अनापदि  ॥ ८.६२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/062_gRhiNaH_putriNo.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Householders, men with sons, respectable natives, and men of the kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra castes are competent to act as witnesses, when cited by suitors;—and not any and every person, except in emergencies.—(62)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कृतदारपरिग्रहा **गृहिणः** । गृहशब्दो दारेषु वर्तते । ते हि स्वकलत्रपरिभवभयान् न कूटम् आचरन्ति । आत्मनि केचिन् निरपेक्षा अपि भवन्ति[^२४२] । अन्यदेशान्तरगमनेनात्मानं रक्षयिष्याम इहैव च क्वचिद् गुप्ता भविष्यामो धनं मित्रं वार्जयाम इत्य् अनया बुद्ध्या अनृतम् अपि वदन्ति । कुटुम्बिनस् तु स्वकुटुम्बभयात् क्व वात्मानं न परिरक्षिष्याम इति दूरं कृत्वा कुटुम्बस्य सापेक्षतया राजदण्दभयान् नान्यथा प्रवर्तन्ते । 


[^२४२]:
     M G: abhibhavanti

**पुत्रिण** इति । पुत्रस्नेहात् पुत्रिणः । अपुत्रदारश् च साक्षिप्रश्नकाले साद्वाचारो ऽपि कदाचिन् न संनिहितो भवति । स हि नैकस्मिन् देशे आस्थानवान् भवति । एवं **मौला** अपि व्याख्येयाः । मौला जानपदास् तद्देशाभिजनाः । ते हि स्वजनज्ञातिमध्ये पापभीरुतया न मिथ्या वदन्ति । मूलं प्रतिष्ठा, सा येषाम् अस्ति ते **मौलाः** । अर्थकथनम् एतत् । तद्धितस् तु भावार्थ एव कर्तव्यः । यो हि यत्र भवः[^२४३] सो ऽपि तस्यास्तित्य् अविरुद्धम् ।


[^२४३]:
     M G: bhāvaḥ

**क्षत्रविट्शूद्रयोनयः** । न ब्राह्मणः । सर्वदा ह्य् अस्याध्ययनाध्यापने विहिते, अन्वहं वाग्निहोत्रहोमः । तत्र दूरस्थे राजनि धर्मोपरोधो ऽस्य मा भूद् इत्य् असौ न कर्तव्यतयोपादीयते । यदृच्छयावगतार्थस् तु साक्ष्यन्तराभावे गरीयसि कार्ये मुख्यतमः स साक्षी । तथा च "ब्रूहीति ब्राह्मणं पृच्छेत्" (म्ध् ८.८८) इति साक्षिप्रश्नो भविष्यति । **योनि**शब्दः प्रत्येकम् अभिसंबध्यते । क्षत्रं[^२४४] योनिर् उत्पत्तिः कारणम् अस्यासौ क्षत्रयोनिः । क्षत्रियजातीय इत्य् अर्थः । क्षत्राद् वा योनिर् जन्मास्येति पञ्चमीति योगविभागात् समासो ऽप्य् उक्तः । अर्थिना यदोक्तं भवत्य् एते मम साक्षिणः तदा[^२४५] साक्षिकर्मणि योग्या भवन्ति । ये तु स्वयम् आगत्य साक्ष्यं ददति न ते साक्षिणः ।   

**अनापदि** । आपत् साक्ष्यन्तराभाव इति <u>केचित्</u> । <u>तद्</u> अयुक्तम् । विसंवादकत्वम् असाक्षित्वे कारणम् । तत्संवादकान्तराभावे नापैति । न वयं ब्रूमः — प्रतिषिद्धसाक्षिभावा[^२४६] विद्यमानानृताभिधानहेतवो ऽर्थसंबन्द्यादयो वास्याम् अवस्थायां प्रतिप्रसूयन्ते — किं तर्हि येषां कदाचिद् आहूयमानानां धर्मविरोधो भवति श्रोत्रियादीनां तेषाम् अविद्यमानेष्व् अन्येष्व् अनुभूतार्थानाम् इदं प्रत्यनुज्ञानं न पुनर् अनृतानाम् ॥ ८.६२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Householders*’—persons who have married; the term ‘*gṛha*,’ ‘house,’
standing for *wife*. Through fear of trouble falling upon their wives,
these men do not act dishonestly; there are many who may be indifferent
in regard to consequences to themselves personally, and may give false
evidence, thinking thus—‘I shall save myself by going away to some other
country, or even in this country I shall hide myself and acquire wealth
and friends’; but when they have a family they have fears regarding the
family and, setting aside all ideas of fleeing away and keeping
themselves safe, and, in the best interests of the family, desist from
dishonest dealings, through fear of punishments being inflicted upon
their family.

‘*Men with sons*;’—through love for their sons, such men shun all
dishonest dealings; and further, people who have no wife and children,
even though they may be quite honest, may not be available (meettai th)?
of the evidence being taken; because such people do not have any fixed
abode.

‘*Maulāḥ*,’ ‘*respectable natives*’;—this also is open to the same
explanation. The terms stand for *natives born in the country*; these,
being afraid of committing a sinful act among their own people, do not
tell lies. the term ‘*maula*’ denotes ‘those who command *mūla* or
respect’; but this is only an explanation of the denotation of the term;
and the nominal affix denotes *nativity*. Men born in a country
generally live there; so there is no incongruity in this.

‘*Men of the kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra castes*,’—not the Brāhmaṇa, as
for him, constant study and teaching have been prescribed,—or the daily
offering of the *Agnihotra* offerings; so that if the King were at a
distance from him, and he were summoned to appear before him, it would
load to a dereliction of his duty; and it is with a view to guard
against this that he is not mentioned as fit for being cited as a
witness. But if the Brāhmaṇa happens to know all about the case, and
there are no other witnesses, and the case is an important one,—then he
is the most important witness. It is with a view to these latter cases
that the exact form of question for the Brāhmaṇa-witness is going to be
laid down:—‘This Brāhmaṇa shall be examined by being asked *to speak*’
(verse 88 *below*).

The term ‘*yoni*’ (in the compound ‘*kṣatra-viṭ-śūdra-yonayaḥ*’) is to
be construed with each of the preceding terms; the meaning being ‘those
of whom the kṣatriya is the *yoni* or origin,’ *i.e*., those of the
*kṣatriya* caste; or the right explanation of the compound may be with
the Ablative—‘*kṣatrāt yoniḥ janma yasya*,’ ‘he whose birth is from the
*kṣatriya* caste.’

These persons become competent witnesses only when the suitor
declares—‘these are my witnesses.’ Those who come and volunteer to give
evidence are not real ‘witnesses.’

‘*Except in emergencies*’.—Some people have explained that the
‘emergency’ meant here is the *absence of other witnesses*. But this is
not right. Because untruthfulness is the only thing that disqualifies
one from being a proper ‘witness’; and this disqualification does not
cease, simply because other truthful witnesses are not available. We do
not mean to say that the phrase (‘except in emergencies’) permits the
admissibility as witnesses of such persons as have been definitely
declared to be disqualified, or of those who have reasons to depose
falsely, or those who are interested in the case; all that we mean is
that in the event of no other witnesses being available, the saving
clause permits the calling of such Vedic scholars and other persons as
may be conversant with the facts of the case, whose summoning might
interfere with these religious practices,—and not of admitted
liars.—(62)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Maulāḥ*’—‘Natives of the place’ (Medhātithi);—‘heads of families or
friends.’

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 665);—and in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 256).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.61-63)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.61].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

श्रोत्रियस्य साक्षित्वे प्रतिषेधाद् ब्राह्मणस्याश्रोत्रियस्यास्ति साक्षित्वम् इति गम्यते । अन्त्यजस्य प्रतिषेधाद् धीनोत्कृष्टानाम् अपि शूद्राणां ग्रहणं प्रतीयते ॥ ८.६२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

062	Householders, men with male issue, and indigenous (inhabitants of the country, be they) Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, or Sudras, are competent, when called by a suitor, to give evidence, not any persons whatever (their condition may be) except in cases of urgency.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/063_AptAH_sarveShu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>063 आप्ताः सर्वेषु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

आप्ताः सर्वेषु वर्णेषु  
कार्याः कार्येषु साक्षिणः ।  
सर्वधर्मविदो ऽलुब्धा  
विपरीतांस् तु वर्जयेत्  ॥ ८.६३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/063_AptAH_sarveShu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In all law-suits trustworthy men of all the castes, fully conversant with morality and free from avarice, should be made witnesses; the reverse of these should be avoided.—(63)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**आप्ता** अविसंवादका यथादृष्टार्थवादिनः येषां लोको विप्रलम्भकत्वं न संभावयति, धर्मानुष्ठानपरा ये ख्याताः । **सर्वधर्मविदः** श्रौतं स्मार्तम् आचारनिरूढं च सर्वं धर्मम् — इह नरकः फलम् इह स्वर्ग इत्य् एवं निरवशेषम् — जानन्ति ते ह्य् अनृताभिधाने नरकं पश्यन्तो बिभ्यति । **अलुब्धा** उदारसत्वा न स्वल्पं धनं बहु मन्यन्ते । एकैकस्य समस्तानि दर्वाणि विशेषणानि, साक्षिक्रियायां गुणभूतत्वाद् गुणे च साहित्यस्य विवक्षितत्वात् । **सर्वेषु वर्णेष्व्** इति । सर्वकार्येषु[^२४७] न जातिनियमो ऽस्तीत्य् उक्तं भवति । यत् पुनर् जातिव्यवस्थावचनं तद् उपरिष्टाद् वक्ष्यामः । तद् एतद् उक्तं भवति । सर्वैः कार्यिभिः सर्वे वर्णा यथासंभवं साक्षिणः कर्तव्याः । **कार्येषु** ऋणादानादिषु । यथोक्तलक्षणात्[^२४८] **विपरीतांस् तु वर्जयेत्** । यद्य् अपि विशिष्टेष्व् अभिहितेषु तद्विपरीतानां प्रसङ्ग एव नास्ति तथापि लौकिको ऽयं पर्युदासः । प्रायेण हि लौकिका अन्यं विधायान्यं[^२४९] तद्विपरीतं निषेधयन्ति । तथा च भवन्ति वक्तारः — "क्रिया हि द्रव्यं विनयति नाद्रव्यम्" इति । किं चाविसंवादकत्वम्[^२५०] इह प्रधानं साक्षिलक्षणं तच् च न विधिमुखेन शक्यावसानम्, किं तु विसंवादकरणाभावमुखेन । न ह्य् अविसंवादकत्वं प्रत्यक्षदृश्यम् । तद् धि यथार्थाभिधानम् । श्रोत्रग्राह्ये च वस्तुनि कुतः प्रत्यक्षो यथार्थनिश्चयः । प्रत्यक्षत्वे हि नैव साक्ष्यवगमो ऽन्विष्यते । न च सर्वत्र परोक्षे वस्तुनि शब्दावगम्ये प्रमाणान्तरसंवादसंभवः । तस्माद् यानि भूयस्त्वेन मिथ्याभिधानकरणतया दृष्टानि तदभावनिश्चयेनाविसंवादकत्वम्[^२५१] अनुमीयते[^२५२] । अतस् तत्प्रदर्शनार्थो ऽयम् उपक्रमो **विपरीतांस् तु वर्जयेद्** इति ॥ ८.६३ ॥


[^२५२]:
     M G: anumīyante


[^२५१]:
     M G: nabhāva-


[^२५०]:
     M G: -vādakam


[^२४९]:
     M G: anyaviṣaye 'nye


[^२४८]:
     M G DK: yathokalakṣaṇāḥ


[^२४७]:
     M G add: ity arthaḥ; DK (1.252) omit: sarvakāryeṣu
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Trustworthy*,’—who never say what is not in conformity with facts; who
always state facts as they are actually seen; with regard to whom people
never have any suspicion of being liars.

‘*Fully conversant witḥ morality*’;—who are always engaged in the
performance of their religious duties, and who know them; *i.e*., who
act up to all that is enjoined in the Veda and in the Smṛtis and
sanctioned by usage, and who know everything regarding what leads to
heaven and what to hell. Such people, perceiving that the telling of
lies will lead to hell, are afraid of untruth.

‘*Free from avarice*,’—*i.e*., of magnanimous temperament, not liable to
regarding a little wealth as much.

Each individual witness should he possessed of all these qualification;
these are stated as subsidiary to the act of giving evidence; and
*combination* is always intended in regard to what are subsidiaries.

‘*Of all castes*’;—that is to say, there is no restriction regarding
castes. As regards the rule relating to the restriction of castes, that
we shall explain later on. The meaning of the present text therefore is
that ‘men of any caste, according as they be available, should ho cited
as witnesses by all suitors.’

‘*In all suits*,’—such as non-payment of debt and the rest.

Those who are the ‘*reverse*’ of those specified above ‘*should be
avoided*.’— Though as a matter of fact, when specially qualified persons
have been specified, there is no possibility of the admission of those
who are the ‘reverse’ of them,—yet the preclusion is in accordance with
popular usage: ordinary men are often found to assert one thing and deny
its contrary (in the same sentence); *e.g*., they are found to say—“an
operation alters a material substance, *and not what is not material*.’
Further, the chief qualification of witnesses is *truthfulness*; and
this cannot be ascertained in its positive form; in fact it can be
ascertained only negatively, by finding out that the man *does not*
pervert truth; this latter again is not perceptible because what the
‘non-perverting of truth’ means is the *telling of truth*, and in regard
to what cm only be *heard* by the ear, bow can there he any
*perceptible* cognition of the truth of what is stated by the words? If
the facts were perceptible, there would be no need for seeking for any
witnesses. And in regard to all things cognisable by means of words,

there is no amenability to any other means of cognition. So that it is
only when it is found that in a certain person all those conditions are
absent which are found to be conducive to telling lies, that the
veracity—*i.e*., his incapability to pervert truth—conies to be
inferred. Thus it is with a view to indicate this that we have the words
‘*the reverse of these should be avoided*.’—(63)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 256 and 281);—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 177).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.61-63)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.61].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**विपरीतांस् तु वर्जयेद्** इत्य् अर्थसिद्धस्याप्य् अनुवादो वाक्यस्वाभाव्याद् आदरार्थः । **सर्ववर्ण**ग्रहणाच् चात्र ब्राह्मणस्यापि साक्षित्वं प्रतीयते । श्रोत्रियस्य प्रतिषेधाद् इतरस्य ॥ ८.६३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

063	Trustworthy men of all the (four) castes (varna) may be made witnesses in lawsuits, (men) who know (their) whole duty, and are free from covetousness; but let him reject those (of an) opposite (character).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/064_nA-rthasambandhino_nAptA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>064 नाऽर्थसम्बन्धिनो नाप्ता ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

नाऽर्थसंबन्धिनो नाप्ता  
न सहाया न वैरिणः ।  
न दृष्टदोषाः कर्तव्या  
न व्याध्यार्ता न दूषिताः  ॥ ८.६४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/064_nA-rthasambandhino_nAptA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Neither interested persons, nor relations, nor helpers, nor enemies, nor persons of proved corruption, nor those afflicted with disease, nor the corrupted should be made witnesses.—(64)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तानीमानि संभाव्यमानमिथ्याभिधानकरणत्वेन पठ्यन्ते । तत्र **अर्थसंबन्धिन** उत्तमर्णाधमर्णाद्याः । उत्तमर्णा ह्य् अधमर्णवचनेन पराजीयमानास् तदानीम् एव रोषावेशवशितः[^२५३] स्तम्भयन्ति धनं प्रयादतुम् अधमर्णम् । अतो ऽसौ[^२५४] संनिहितधनिकचित्तम् अनुवर्तमानः तदनुगुणं वक्तुं शक्नोति[^२५५] । तस्माद् असौ न साक्षी । उत्तमर्णो ऽपि निर्धने ऽधमर्णे व्यवहारजयाच् च धनप्राप्तौ मह्यम् अयं प्रतिदास्यतीत्य् अनया बुद्ध्या कदाचित् तत्पक्षानुगुणं वक्तीति सो ऽप्य् असाक्षी ।


[^२५५]:
     M G DK (1:254): saṃnihitadhanatvāc cittam anuvartamānaḥ śakyate


[^२५४]:
     M G: 'tau


[^२५३]:
     M G: -vaśitāḥ

अथ वार्थः प्रयोजनं यस्य साक्षिणो विवादिभ्यां किंचित् प्रयोजनं साध्यम्, तेन वा तयोः, स उपकारगन्धान् न साक्षी । यो वा व्यवहारगतेनार्थेन समानफलः । इत्य् एवंप्रकार्**आर्थसंबन्धिनः** ।   

**आप्ता** मित्रबान्धवतया[^२५६] कार्याभ्यन्तराः पितृव्यमातुलादयः । **सहायाः** प्रतिभूप्रभृतयो । **वैरिणः** प्रसिद्धाः । **दृष्टदोषा** अन्यत्र कृतकौटसाक्ष्याः । अन्यद् वा प्रतिषिद्धम् आचरितवन्तः । **व्याध्यार्ता** रोगपीडिताः । न पुनर् ईषद्रोगिण इत्य् आर्तग्रहणम् । पीडितस्य हि क्रोधविस्मृत्यादयो मिथ्यावचने संभाव्यन्ते । **दूषिताः** पातकिनो ऽभ्यस्तोपपातकाश् च । **दृष्टदोष**ग्रहणं तु तेषाम् एव कृतनिग्रहाणां परिग्रहार्थम् । ते हि राजभिर् धृतदण्डग्राहितविनयत्वान्[^२५७] न संप्रति दूषीता भवन्ति ॥ ८.६४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The following persons are named, as showing those persons in whose case
causes for telling lies are likely to be present.

Among these are (1) ‘*interested persons*’ —*i.e*., persons standing
related to each other in the relation of the creditor, the debtor and so
forth. If a person loses a ease through the deposition of one who
happens to be his debtor, he is likely to become enraged at that very
time and to press the debtor for immediate repayment of the debt; in
view of this the debtor is likely to be swayed by a desire to keep the
creditor pleased; and as such he cannot he a witness. Similarly, in a
suit filed by the debtor against some one, his creditor would be swayed
by the consideration that if the penniless suitor won his case, he would
he able to repay his own dues; and as such he would he likely to depose
falsely in his favour; for this reason he also cannot be a true witness.

Or, ‘*interest*’ mean *purpose, object*; thus persons who have some end
in view,—who stand to gain from either party,—or from whom either party
is likely to gain something—are called ‘*interested*’—their interest in
the case being similar to that of the parties themselves.

‘*Relations*’—friends and relations knowing the insand outs of the
case,—*e.g*., paternal and maternal uncles, etc.

‘*Helpers*’—those who have stood security and others similarly situated.

‘*Enemies*’—what these are is well known.

‘*Persons of proved corruption*,’—those who have home false evidence in
other cases, or who have committed other forbidden acts.

‘*Afflicted with disease*,’—*i.e*., those affected by serious,—not
paltry-ailments; this is what is implied by the term ‘*afflicted*.’
Those labouring under such afflictions are likely to lose temper, to
forget things and to perjure themselves.

‘*Corrupted*,’— those who have committed a mortal sin, or have
repeatedly committed minor sins. the term ‘*of proved corruption*’ is
meant to refer to those who hare been convicted of, and punished for, a
serious crime. Such persons are no longer regarded as ‘*corrupted*,’
because they have been brought under discipline by having paid to t he
king the penalty for their sin.—(64)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Arthasambandhinaḥ*’—‘Persons having money-dealings with either of the
two parties’ (Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda);—‘having an interest in the suit’ (Nārāyaṇa and
Medhātithi, alternatively); ‘who have received benefits from the
parties’ (Nandana).

‘*Sahāyāḥ*’—‘Sureties and the like’ (Medhātithi);—‘Servants’ (Kullūka
and Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 66);—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī*, (p. 281);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p.
10a);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (29b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
49a), which says that these texts set forth those qualities, which make
a man unreliable as a witness, and it reproduces Medhātithi’s
explanations of the words.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.64-67)  
**

*Gautama* (13.2).—(See under 63.)

*Āpastamba* (2.29.7).—(See under 63.)

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.28).—(See under 63.)

*Viṣṇu* (8.2-4).—‘The King cannot be made a witness; nor an ascetic, nor
a learned Brāhmaṇa, nor a gamester, nor a thief, nor a person who is not
his own master, nor a woman, nor a child, nor a perpetrator of violence,
nor one overaged, nor one intoxicated or insane, nor a man of
ill-repute, nor an outcast, nor one tormented by hunger or thirst, nor
one oppressed by a sudden calamity, nor one wholly absorbed in evil
passions;—nor an enemy or a friend, nor one interested in the
subject-matter, nor one who does forbidden acts; nor one formerly
perjured; nor an attendant; nor one who, without being appointed, comes
and offers his evidence.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.70-71).—‘The following are not to be made
witnesses:—Woman, child, aged person, gamester, one intoxicated or
insane, one accused of a heinous crime, actor, heretic, forger, one with
defective organs, outcast, a near relative, or one related in business,
friend, enemy, thief, one addicted to violence, those beset with
perceptible faults, one despised (by good men).’

*Baudhāyana* (1.19.13).—(See under 62.)

*Nārada* (1.157-162).—‘Incompetent witnesses have been declared by the
learned to be of five sorts: (1) Actually declared by law to be
incompetent, (2) incompetent on account of depravity, (3) incompetent by
reason of contradiction, (4) one of uncalled for deposition, (5) one of
intervening decease. (1) Learned Brāhmaṇas, devotees, aged persons and
ascetics are those who have been declared by law to be incompetent,
without any reason being given for it;—(2) thieves, robbers, dangerous
characters, gamblers and assassins are incompetent by reason of their
depravity, there is no truth to be found in them;—(3) if the statements
of witnesses called by the King do not agree, they are rendered
incompetent by reason of contradiction,—(4) he who, without being
appointed to be a witness, comes of his own accord to make a deposition,
is called a *spy* in the law-books and he is unworthy to bear
testimony;—(5) where can any person bear testimony, if the claimant is
no longer in existence, whose claim should have been heard? Such a
person is rendered incompetent by reason of intervening decease.’

*Nārada* (1.177-192).—‘Those must not be examined as witnesses who are
interested in the suit; nor friends or associates or enemies or
notorious offenders or persons stained with a heavy sin;—nor a slave or
an impostor, or one not admitted to Śrāddhas; nor a child, nor an
oil-presser, nor one intoxicated, nor a mad man, nor a careless man, nor
one distressed, nor a gamester, nor one who sacrifices for the whole
village;—nor one engaged in a long journey, nor a merchant who travels
to transmarine countries, nor a religious ascetic, nor one sick or
deformed; nor a simple man, nor a learned Brāhmaṇa, nor one who neglects
religious practices, nor a eunuch nor an actor;—nor an atheist, nor an
apostate, nor one who has forsaken his wife or his fire, nor one who
makes illicit offerings, nor an associate who eats out of the same dish
as oneself, nor an adversary, nor a spy, nor a relation, nor one related
by the same womb;—nor one who has proved an evil-doer, nor a public
dancer, nor one who lives by poison, nor a snake-catcher, nor a
poisoner, nor an incendiary, nor one who has committed a minor
offence;—nor one oppressed by fatigue, nor a ferocious man, nor one who
has relinquished worldly appetites, nor one penniless, nor a member of
the lowest castes, nor one leading a bad life, nor one still a student,
nor an oilman nor a dealer in roots;—nor one obsessed by a demon, nor an
enemy of the King, nor a weather-prophet, nor an astrologer, nor a
malicious person, nor one self-sold, nor one of deficient limbs, nor one
living by prostitution;—nor one with bad nails or black teeth, nor one
who betrays his friend, nor a rogue, nor a dealer in spirituous liquor,
nor a juggler, nor an avaricious or cruel man, nor an enemy of the
company of traders or of an association;—nor one who takes animal-life,
nor a leather-manufacturer, or a cripple, or an outcast, or a forger, or
a quack, or an apostate, or a robber, or one of the King’s
attendants;—nor a Brāhmaṇa who sells human beings, cattle meat, bones,
honey, milk, water or butter; nor a member of a twice-born caste who is
addicted to usury;—nor one who neglects his duties, nor a judge, nor a
bard, nor one who serves low people, nor one who quarrels with his
father, nor one who causes dissension. These are the incompetent
witnesses. When a heinous crime, or a robbery or adultery or defamation
has been committed, the King should not inquire too strictly into the
character of the witnesses. A child also cannot be made a witness; nor a
woman, nor one man alone, nor a cheat, nor a relation, nor an enemy. By
the consent of both parties even one man alone may become a witness in a
suit.’

*Bṛhaspati* (7.29-30).—‘The mother’s father, the father’s brother, the
wife’s brother, maternal uncle, brother, friend and son-in-law are
inadmissible as witnesses in all disputes. Persons addicted to adultery
or to drinking, gamblers, calumniators, insane, suitering, violent
persons and unbelievers cannot act as witnesses.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **नार्थसंबन्धिनो नाप्ता न सहाया न वैरिणः ।**  
> **न दृष्टदोषाः कर्तव्याह्**

अन्यस्मिन् व्यवहारे कूटसाक्षित्वेन

> **न व्याध्यार्ता न दूषिताः  ॥ ८.६४ ॥**

ते हि स्मृतिप्रमाणाद् उभयत्र न स्युः । निमित्तेन च प्रतिषेधाद् अनार्तो व्याधितो ऽपि स्यात् । पातकोपपातकाभिशंसा दूषितो ऽपि न स्यात् ॥ ८.६४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

064	Those must not be made (witnesses) who have an interest in the suit, nor familiar (friends), companions, and enemies (of the parties), nor (men) formerly convicted (of perjury), nor (persons) suffering under (severe) illness, nor (those) tainted (by mortal sin).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/065_na_sAxI.md">
<details open><summary><h3>065 न साक्षी ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

न साक्षी नृपतिः कार्यो  
न कारुक-कुशीलवौ ।  
न श्रोत्रियो न लिङ्गस्थो  
न सङ्गेभ्यो विनिर्गतः  ॥ ८.६५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/065_na_sAxI.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king should not be made a witness; nor craftsmen, nor actors, nor a Vedic scholar, nor one in holy orders, nor one who has renounced all attachments.—(65)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

त्वं मे साक्षी भविष्यसीति व्यवहारकृता धनविसर्गादिकाले साक्षित्वे **नृपतिर्** नाध्येषितव्यः । तस्य हि सक्ष्यं ददतः पक्षपातम् आशङ्केरन् । प्रभुत्वाद् वा ददतो ऽन्यतरस्य कार्यनाशः । न च साक्षिधर्मेण प्रष्टुं युज्यते । तद्देशवासी च यद्य् अपि लेखादिना संवदयेत् तथापि साक्षिधर्मं सर्वं न कुर्याद् इति तदेशवासिनो राज्ञः साक्षिकरणप्रतिषेधः[^२५८] ।


[^२५८]:
     M G DK: samānakaraṇapratiṣedhaḥ

**कारुका**दीनां स्वकार्योपरोधशङ्कया । संगत्या च ते जीवन्ति । स्वभावश् चैष जानपदानां यत् स्वयं निश्चितवन्तो ऽपि "जीवामहे वयम्" इति जिताः साक्षिकादिभ्यो रुष्यन्ति । ततश् च सार्वलौकिकी संगतिः कारुकादीनाम् उच्छिद्यते । किं च प्रकृतिपरिलघुत्वात् तेषां वृत्तेश्[^२५९] चलयितुम् अपि शक्यन्ते । तथा च पक्षपातं भजेरन् ।  

**श्रोत्रियस्य** तु साक्षित्वे कर्तव्यता प्रतिषिध्यते राजवन् न पुनर् अप्रत्ययिततया[^२६०] । न हि श्रोत्रियत्वं प्रामाण्यं विहन्ति, जनयत्य् एव विशेषतः । न हि श्रोत्रियत्वं विसंवादहेतुतयोपलब्धम् । एवम् उत्तरत्रापि ।  

**कारुकाः** शिल्पोपजीविनः सूपकारायस्कारादयः । **कुशीलवाः** नटनर्तकगायनाद्याः । **श्रोत्रियो** वेदपाठकः । यस् त्व् अध्ययनतत्परः स इह गृह्यते । अथ वा श्रोत्रियत्वं कर्मानुष्ठानोपलक्षणार्थम् । तेनानुष्ठानपरस्य तद्विरोधतया प्रतिषेधः । **लिङ्गस्थो** ब्रह्मचारी । परिव्राजकपाखण्डलिङ्गधारिणस् तु कुशास्त्रवर्तित्वाद् एवाप्राप्ताः । **सङ्गेभ्यो विनिर्गता** वेदसंन्यासिनो गृहस्थाः । **सङ्गः** अभ्यासतो[^२६१] विषयोपभोगः, दृष्टार्थकर्मारम्भो वा ॥ ८.६५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

At the time that one is lending out money, the king should not he made a
party to the transaction by being requested to the effect ‘yon shall he
my witness.’ Because if the king gave evidence, people would suspect him
of partiality,—being all-powerful as he is; and tin’s would lead to the
detriment of the interest of one or the other;—nor would it be proper to
question the king in the same manner as an ordinary witness. Though
being an inhabitant of the same place, the king might corroborate
statements by means of written notes, yet what is forbidden is his
appearance as a regular witness of the ordinary class.

As for craftsmen and the rest, they should not be made witnesses for
fear of injury to their business. These men live by the good-will of the
people; and it is human nature that though men know (that their case is
false), yet the mere consideration that they are losing it leads them to
bear a grudge against the witnesses and others; and thus the universal
goodwill of the artisan and the rest becomes lost, further, in as much
as these men are of mean nature, they are prone to being diverted from
the path of honesty, and hence becoming partial.

As regards the ‘*Vedic scholar*,’ what is denied is not his
trustworthiness, but the propriety of his appearing as a witness; just
as in the case of the king. Because the foot of the man being a ‘Vedic
scholar’ does not deprive him of his trustworthiness; on the contrary,
it only intensifies it to a special degree; and (his for the same reason
that *Vedic scholarship* has never been found to be the instigator of
perjury.

Similarly with those that follow.

‘*Craftsmen*’—those that make a living by some crafts; such as cooks and
the like.

‘*Actors*’—dancers, singers and so forth.

‘*Vedic scholar*’—one who studies the Veda; the person meant here is one
who is always engaged in Vedic study. Or, ‘Vedic scholarship’ may be
taken as indicating *the performance of religions rites*; and in that,
case the prohibition would apply to one who is engaged in such
performance;—the work of the witness being prejudicial to such rites.

‘*One in holy orders*’—the Religious student. As for those who merely
wear the badge of the Wandering Mendicant, or of the heretical
orders,—these are inadmissible on the ground of their following the
heretical scriptures.

‘*One toko has renounced attachments*’—This stands for those
householders who have ‘renounced the Veda.’ ‘*Attachment*’ means either
the repeated enjoyment of sensual objects, or the undertaking of acts
for ordinary worldly purposes—.(65)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kuśīlava*’—‘Actors, dancers singers and so forth’
(Medhātithi);—‘actors’ (Nārāyaṇa);—‘actors and so forth’ (Govindarāja
and Kullūka);—‘singers’ (Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 66);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 10a);—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p.
281);—in *Smṛticandrikā*, (Vyavahāra, p. 177);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(80b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 49b), which reproduces
Medhātithi’s, explanation.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.64-67)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.64].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**नृपतेः** साक्षित्वप्रतिषेधः सत्यविभावने ऽपि तस्य पक्षपरिग्रहाशङ्कया अवचनेन च परिक्षयो जानपदानाम् । अथ वा समानदेशस्य राज्ञः अवश्यत्वात् प्रतिषेधः । अथ वा व्यवहारद्रष्टू राज्ञः साक्षित्वम् अयुक्तम् । **कारुका** नित्यव्यापृताः **कुशीलवा** नित्यप्रोषिताः । सर्वजनपदसंबन्धेन वा, तेषाम् अनृताशङ्कया तत्प्रत्यवायाद् [असाक्षित्वम्] । श्रोत्रियस्य धर्मोपरोधाशङ्कया तदानयनपीडाशङ्कया च । एतेन **लिङ्गस्थो** व्याख्यातः । अथ तु सोपधः सुतरां तस्य प्रतिषेधो युक्तो । नृ । । । त्रियत्वान् अन् यायापराभिः (?)  ॥ ८.६५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

065	The king cannot be made a witness, nor mechanics and actors, nor a: Srotriya, nor a student of the Veda, nor (an ascetic) who has given up (all) connexion (with the world),
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/066_nA-dhyadhIno_na.md">
<details open><summary><h3>066 नाऽध्यधीनो न ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

नाऽध्यधीनो न वक्तव्यो  
न दस्युर् न विकर्मकृत् ।  
न वृद्धो न शिशुर् नैको  
नाऽन्त्यो न विकलेन्द्रियः  ॥ ८.६६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/066_nA-dhyadhIno_na.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

—Not one wholly dependent, nor one under pupilage, nor a paid servant, nor one who adopts forbidden occupations, nor one too old, nor a minor, nor a single person, nor one belonging to the lowest class, nor one with defective organs;—(66)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अध्यधीन**शब्दो ऽत्यन्तपरतन्त्रगर्भदासादौ रूढ्या वर्तते । <u>अन्ये</u> तु तुल्यसंहितत्वाद् "अध्याधीनः" इति पठन्ति । अध्याधीनो बन्धकीकृतः । **वक्तव्यो** ऽनुशास्यः शिष्यपुत्रादिः, आचार्याधीनत्वात् । अथ वा कुष्ठादिना कुत्सितकायः । **दस्युः** भृतिदासः वैतनिकः "स ह्य् उपादासयति" कर्माणीति नैरुक्ते निरुक्तः । तस्य च दिवसभृतत्वान् नात्यन्तपारतन्त्र्यम् अस्तीति पृथग् उपदेशः क्रियते । कर्मजीवनत्वापत्तौ तथाविधानां जीविकोच्छेदः, लघुवृत्तित्वाच् च लोभादिसंभवेनाप्रत्ययिततापि । चौरस्य तु शब्दान्तरोपादानान् न **दस्यु**ग्रहणेन ग्रहणम् । कठिणहृदयो वा **दस्युः** क्रूरचेष्टः । **विकर्मकृच्** छास्त्रविरुद्धं यः कर्म करोति । यथा ब्राह्मणः क्षत्रियवृत्तिं वैश्यो वेत्यादि । **वृद्धो** वयःपरिणामाद् असंस्मृतिः । **शिशुर्** बालो ऽप्राप्तव्यवहारः । **एकः**[^२६२] त्र्यवरग्रहणेनैकस्याप्राप्तेः प्रतिषेधो द्वयोः कस्यांचिद् अवस्थायाम् अभ्यनुज्ञानार्थः, यथा त्रिहस्ताचारोपत्रे[^२६३] । यद्य् अपि तत्र तृतीयलेखको न[^२६४] भवति तथापि लेखनमात्रस्य व्यापारो न साक्षित्व इति कस्यचिद् इयम् आशङ्का स्यात् । **अन्त्यो** बर्बरचण्डालादिः, स्ववर्गाद्[^२६५] अन्यत्र । शूद्रयोनित्वेन प्राप्तस्य प्रतिषेधः । **विकलेन्द्रियो** ऽन्धबधिरादिः, शरीरपीडयोपलब्धिर् विकलत्वाच् च ॥ ८.६६ ॥


[^२६५]:
     M G DK: svadharmād


[^२६४]:
     M G DK omit: na


[^२६३]:
     DK: trihastācārapatre (perhaps attempting to correct the sandhi); could the original be trihastācāre patre?


[^२६२]:
     M G DK (1: 256): evaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*One wholly dependent*’:—this term is applied by usage to the horn
slave and such other persons who are entirely subservient to other
persons.

Others read ‘*adhyādhīna*,’ which means a *prisoner*.

‘*One under pupilage*’—the son or the pupil (of either party), who is
entirely under the sway of the Teacher. Or the term ‘*vaktaryaḥ*’ may he
taken as standing for one whose body has been deformed by leprosy or
some such disease.

‘*Dasyu*’ here stands for the servant engaged on fixed wages,—so called
because he ‘accomplishes work’ (), as explained by the followers of the
Nirukta. Since such a servant is engaged on daily wages, he is not
absolutely dependent on others; that is why he has been mentioned
separately. As persons belonging to this class live upon the wages
earned, they would become deprived of their livelihood (if they deposed
against their employer); and further, as their living is small, they are
liable to corruption, hence untrustworthy also. As for the *thief* or
*robber* (who also is called ‘*dasyu*’), as he is mentioned by a
separate word (in the next verse), he cannot be taken as spoken of here
by means of the term ‘*dasyu*.’ Or, the term ‘*dasyu*’ may stand for a
*hard-hearted person*, one of cruel disposition.

‘*Vikarmakṛṭ*’ is one who adopts an occupation forbidden by the
scriptures; *e.g*., the *Brāhmaṇa* adopting the occupation of the
*Kṣatriya*, or the *Kṣatriya* that of the *Vaiśya* and so forth.

‘*Too old*.’—One who is too old is subject to lapses of memory.

‘*Minor*,’—one who is too young and not yet entered business.

‘*A single person*’—in as much as ‘at least three’ has already been laid
down,—which leaves no possibility of citing a single witness—the
prohibition of ‘a single person’ is to be taken as permitting under
certain circumstances, the citing of *only two* witnesses. Otherwise, in
a case where, it being laid down that a document must be attested by
three persons,—people might be led to think that if the third attestor
is not present, the other two persons may *write*, but they are not
admissible as a ‘witness.’

‘*Person belonging to the lowest class*’— the barbarian, the *Caṇḍāla*
and so forth. These are percluded here, because they might be regarded
as admissible by reason of their having their origin in the Śūdra-caste
(who is permitted in verse 60).

“*One with defective organs*’— with his perceptive faculties rendered
defective by bodily disease.—(66)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vaktavyaḥ*’—‘Son or pupil or such others as can be ordered about’
(Medhātithi and Rāmacandra);—‘one whose body is disfigured by leprosy or
such other diseases’ (Medhātithi, alternative);—‘despised by reason of
misconduct’ (Nārāyaṇa, Kullūka, Rāghavānanda and Nandana).

‘*Dasyu*,’—‘Servant receiving wages’ (Medhātithi. Govindarāja and
Rāghavānanda);—‘cruel man’ (Medhātithi, alternative, Kuljūka and
Rāghavānanda); ‘low-caste man’ (Nandana)‘murderer’ (Rāmacandra).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 66)—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 10a);—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p.
281);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 177);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (30b),
which explains ‘*adhyadhīnaḥ*’ as one who is held in bondage;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 49b), which reproduces Medhātithi’s
explanations.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.64-67)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.64].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**अध्यधीनो** गर्भदासः, अत्यन्त[परतन्तत्वात् । अनुशास्या अ]पीति **वक्तव्यो** ऽङ्गव्यसनः कुष्ट्यादिश् च । स च जात्यन्तरे दोषाशङ्कया । एवं कर्मावशेषेणेति वक्ष्यति । **दस्युर्** दासह्- उपसादयति कर्माणि क्षपयतीति । [अपि च] **दस्युस्** तस्करः । **न विकर्मकृत्**, अधार्मिकत्वात् । **वृद्धशिश्वोर्** अतीताप्राप्तव्यवहारत्वात् प्रतिषेधः । एकस्य साक्षित्वप्रतिषेधस् "त्र्यपरैर्" इति सिद्धः, यतः [अस्मिन् श्लोके] एकस्यापि विशेषनिषेधात् पाक्षिकः पूर्वश्लोकः । अयं पुनः प्रतिषिद्धप्रतिप्रसवार्थः । [एकस्यै]व साक्षित्वम् "एको ऽलुब्धस् तु साक्षी स्यात्ऽ इति वक्ष्यति । **अन्त्यः** शूद्रः, तस्य च विधिप्रतिषेधात् पाक्षिकं साक्षित्वं गुणापेक्षया । अथ वा चण्डालो **ऽन्त्यः** । तथा वक्ष्यति "स्त्रीणां साक्ष्यं स्त्रियः कुर्युः" इति शूद्रान् अभिधार्य "अन्त्यानाम् अन्त्ययोनयः" इति । वर्णापसदमात्रं वा । **विकलेन्द्रियो** विसंज्ञत्वात् प्रतिषिध्यते ॥ ८.६६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

066	Nor one wholly dependent, nor one of bad fame, nor a Dasyu, nor one who follows forbidden occupations, nor an aged (man), nor an infant, nor one (man alone), nor a man of the lowest castes, nor one deficient in organs of sense,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/067_nArto_na.md">
<details open><summary><h3>067 नार्तो न ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

नार्तो न मत्तो नोन्मत्तो  
न क्षुत्-तृष्णोपपीडितः ।  
न श्रमार्तो न कामार्तो  
न क्रुद्धो नाऽपि तस्करः  ॥ ८.६७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/067_nArto_na.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

—Nor one afflicted, nor one intoxicated, nor one demented, nor one tormented by hunger and thirst, nor one oppressed by fatigue, nor one tormented by love, nor one who is in a rage, nor a thief.—(67)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**आर्तो** बन्धुधनादिनाशेन । **मत्तो** मद्यमदक्षीबः । अपस्मारगृहीत **उन्मत्तः** पिशाचकी । **क्षुत्तृष्णोपपीडितो** बुभुक्षापिपासाभ्यां व्यथितः । **श्रमः** कायचेष्टाधिक्येन दूराध्वगमनयुद्धादिनोत्पन्नस् तेन्**आर्तः** पीडितः । **कामः** स्त्रीसङ्गाभिलाषस् तेन्**आर्तो** विप्रलंभो ऽत्यन्तसंयोगो[^२६६] द्वाव् अपि तावत् प्रत्ययौ चित्तोपप्लवात् तत्साधने च विप्रलंभाशङ्कया च । **क्रुद्धो** ऽन्यस्मिन्न् अपि बहुतरक्रोधः । स हि क्रोधेन व्याप्तचित्तत्वान् न यावद् अनुभवति नाप्य् अनुभूतं स्मरति । **तस्करश्** चौरः । यद्य् अप्य् असौ विकर्मकृत् तथापि भेदोपादानाद् गोबलीवर्दन्यायो द्रष्टव्यः ॥ ८.६७ ॥


[^२६६]:
     DK (1: 257): -saṃyogī
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Afflicted*’—by the death of relatives and friends.

‘*Intoxicated*’—senseless through wine.

‘*Demented*’—seized by epilepsy, or obsessed by ghosts.

‘*Tormented by hunger or thirst*’—Suffering from the pangs of hunger or
thirst.

‘*Fatigue*’—caused by much physical labour, involved in walking long
distances, engaging in battle and so forth;—‘*oppressed*’ by it.

‘*Love*’—Desire for intercourse with women. One who is separated from
his beloved, as also one who is too much with her,—both of them are
untrustworthy, on account of their mind being engrossed in the loved
one, or in the fear of being separated from her.

‘*In rage*’—who is too angry with some person,—even other than the
parties of the suit; such a person having his mind entirely taken up
with rage is unable to perceive things rightly, or to remember them
correctly.

‘*Thief*’;—even though the thief also is ‘*one who adopts a forbidden
occupation*,’ yet since ho has been mentioned separately, it has to be
explained on the analogy of the expression ‘*go-balīvarda*’ (‘cows and
hulls’).—(67)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 66);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 10a);—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p.
281);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 177);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(30b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 49b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.64-67)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.64].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**आर्तो** बन्धुविनाशादिना । एवं चोक्तव्याध्यार्ताद् अन्यो ऽयम् । **मत्तोन्मत्तौ** प्रसिद्दौ **क्षुत्तृष्णोपपीडितश्** च । **क्रुद्धः** क्रोधनत्वाद् अप्रत्ययवृत्तिः । **तस्करो** गोबलीवर्दन्यायेन **विकर्मकृद्**उपदेशाद् विज्ञेयः ॥ ८.६७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

067	Nor one extremely grieved, nor one intoxicated, nor a madman, nor one tormented by hunger or thirst, nor one oppressed by fatigue, nor one tormented by desire, nor a wrathful man, nor a thief.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/068_strINAM_sAxyam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>068 स्त्रीणां साक्ष्यम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

स्त्रीणां साक्ष्यं स्त्रियः कुर्युर्  
द्विजानां सदृशा द्विजाः ।  
शूद्राश् च सन्तः शूद्राणाम्  
अन्त्यानाम् अन्त्य-योनयः  ॥ ८.६८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/068_strINAM_sAxyam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

—Woman should give evidence for women; and for twice-born persons similar twice-born men, virtuous śūdhas for śūdras, and men of the lowest caste for the lowest men.—(68)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यत्र पुमांसाव् अर्थिप्रत्यर्थिनौ तत्र स्त्रीणां साक्ष्यं नास्ति । यत्र तु स्त्रिया सह पुंसः कार्यं स्त्रीणाम् एव चेतरेतरं स्वल्पम्, तत्र भवन्त्य् एव स्त्रियः साक्षिण्यः । न चायं नियमः स्त्रीणां स्त्रिय एव साक्ष्यं कुर्युर् न पुमांसः । केवलं पुंविषये व्यवहारे क्वचिद् एव स्त्रीणां साक्ष्यं यतो "अस्थिरत्वात्" (म्ध् ८.७७) इति हेतुर् उपात्तः । भवन्ति काश्चन स्त्रियो ब्रह्मवादिन्य इव सत्यवादिन्यः स्थिरबुद्धयश् च ।

**द्विजानां सदृशा द्विजाः** । यः प्रमाणतरो द्विजः स विसदृशं शङ्क्यमानप्रमाणभावम् अपि दिशन् साक्ष्ये न श्रद्धेयवचनो भवति । यतस् तथाभूतेन प्रमाणभूत एव द्रष्टव्यः । स हि तस्य सदृशः । सदृशानां हि समानदेशस्थानम्[^२६७] इतरेतरकार्यज्ञत्वं च संभाव्यते । इतरस्य तु तत्प्रदेशसंनिधिर् यत्नेन साध्यः । सदृशयोस् त्व् औचित्यात्[^२६८] सिद्ध एव । एवं हीनस्य हीनगुणो ऽपि सदृशाद् ग्रहीतव्यः । न तूत्कृष्टगुणो न ग्रहीतव्यः । सादृश्यं जात्या शिल्पादिना वा गुणेन क्रियया वा श्रुताध्ययनादिकया समानशीलतया च । एतच् च नातिमहति कार्ये द्रष्टव्यम् । न हि हीनगुणेषु प्रययितता निश्चीयते ।   

**अन्त्यानां** चण्डालश्वपचादीनां तादृशा एव्**आन्त्ययोनयः** । अन्ते भवा अन्त्याः । सा योनिर् उत्पत्तिकारणं येषां इति विग्रहः । प्रदर्शनं चैतत् । ये समाना जातिशिल्पशीलादिभिस् तेषाम् इहानुक्तानाम् अपि वणिक्कारुकुशीलवादीनाम्, हेतोः समानत्वात् ॥ ८.६८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the case where both plaintiff and defendant are males, the evidence
of females is not admissible; when however the suit lies between a male
and a female, or between two females,—there women do appear as
witnesses. But there is no restriction as to women alone—and no
men,—being witnesses for women. In fact it is only in suits relating
entirely to males that woman are admissible as witnesses only in special
cases, since the only reason that is given for excluding women is their
fickleness, but there are some women who are as truthful as the best
propounded of the Veda and as steady.

‘*For twice-born persons similar twite-born men*’ As for the twice-born
person of the higher class, and hence more trustworthy,—he may make
certain statements whose veracity may be doubted,—and hence his words
are not absolutely reliable. In fact the witness should be one who is
accepted by the parties as reliable; and this is possible only when he
belongs to the same class; as it is only men of the same class who by
reason of living in the same place are expected to know all about one
another’s transactions; while for others, it would be difficult to come
into sufficiently close proximity with men of the lower strata; which,
on the other hand, is always available for men of the same class.
Similarly for men of inferior qualities, men of the same kind are to be
witnesses; though this does not mean that persons with higher
qualifications are not admissible.

The ‘*similarity*’ here meant may be—(*a*) in caste, or (*b*) in
occupation, or (*c*) in qualities, or (*d*) in action, such as the
studying of the Veda and so forth, or (*e*) in character.

But all this restriction is not meant to be applicable to very important
suits; because as a rule much reliability is not found in men with
inferior qualifications.

‘*Far men of the lowest class*’—such as the *Caṇḍāla* and the rest—men
of the same low class. The compound ‘*antya-yonayaḥ*’ is to be expounded
as those who have their *yoni* or origin in the lowermost stratum.

This is meant to be only illustrative. The same rule holds good
regarding other classes of people,—such as craftsmen, actors and so
forth,—for whom also the *witnesses* should be ‘*similar*’—in caste,
occupation, character, etc.; though these have not been mentioned in the
text; because the same reason is present in their case also.—(68)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Sadṛśāḥ*’—‘Inhabitants of the same place, of the same caste, same
occupations, same qualifications’ (Medhātithi);—‘of the same caste’
(Kullūka) ‘of the same caste and equally virtuous’ (Govindarāja).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 665);—in *Mitākṣarā* (on
2.68);—in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 214);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p.
9b);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*, 30b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 47a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.30).—‘Let the King admit women as witnesses regarding
women; for twice-born men, twice-born men of the same caste; good Śūdras
for Śūdras, and men of low birth for men of the low caste.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.69).—‘Or all men may be witnesses for all castes.’

*Nārada* (1.153).—‘Among companies of artisans, or guilds of merchants,
artisans or merchants shall be witnesses; and members of an association
among other members of the association; persons living outside, among
those living outside; and women among women.’

*Nārada* (1.156).—‘If in a company of artisans or guilds of merchants,
or in any other association, anyone falls out with his associates, they
should not bo made witnesses against him; for they all are his enemies.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अर्थव्यवहारेषु स्वस्थवृत्तयः आत्मनो जात्यादिसादृश्येन साक्षिणः स्युः, अर्थप्रयोक्तारो ऽन्ये वार्थसंबन्धिनः । एवं च प्रदर्शनार्थत्वाद् अस्य तापसप्रव्रजितवणिक्कुशीलवगोपालकादीनां सादृश्येन साक्षिणः स्युः । तथा च ऽक्षत्रविट्शूद्रयोनयः" इति सामान्यनिर्देशो ऽयं द्रष्टव्यः । अर्थव्यवहारेभ्यस् त्व् अन्यत्र —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

068	Women should give evidence for women, and for twice-born men twice-born men (of the) same (kind), virtuous Sudras for Sudras, and men of the lowest castes for the lowest.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/069_anubhAvI_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>069 अनुभावी तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अनुभावी तु यः कश् चित्  
कुर्यात् साक्ष्यं विवादिनाम् ।  
अन्तर्वेश्मन्य् अरण्ये वा  
शरीरस्याऽपि चाऽत्यये  ॥ ८.६९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/069_anubhAvI_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of anything done in the interior of a house, or in a forest, or in the case of injury to the body,—any person who may be cognisant of the facts may give evidence on behalf of the parties to the suit.—(69)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अन्तर्वेश्मनि** यत् कार्यम् अतर्कितोपनतं वाग्दण्डपारुष्यसंग्रहस्तेयसाहसादिरूपम्, अरण्ये वा तादृशम् एव, शरीरे च पीड्यमाने तत्काले दस्युभिर् अन्यैर् वा यतः कुतश्चिद् गृहीतम्, यो वा धननिमित्तं प्रतिभूत्वेन स्थापितः, न च साक्षिणो लब्यन्ते न वा तावत्कालं प्रतिपालयन्ति,[^२६९] रहसि चोक्तो वार्थम् आददते अप्रकाशम् — तादृशे विषये **यः कश्चिद् अनुभावी** स साक्षित्वेन ग्रहीतव्यः । **अनुभावी** साक्षाद् द्रष्टा । **यः कश्चिद्** इति न जातिनियमः, सदृशं च तदा नास्तीत्य् आह । 


[^२६९]:
     M G DK (1: 257) read: sākṣiṇām eva sarvo rājapuruṣādikaṃ na copadravanti, and place sākṣiṇo labyante na vā tāvatkālaṃ pratipālayanti after sākṣitvena grahītavyaḥ

**अन्तर्वेश्मनीति** विरलजनोपलक्षणार्थम् । तेन शून्यदेवतायतनादीन्य् अपि विरलजनानि गृह्यन्ते । तथा **चारण्य**ग्रहणम् अस्यैवार्थस्य प्रदर्शनार्थम् । 


<u>अन्ये</u> तु **शरीरस्यापि चात्यय** इत्य् अन्यथा व्याख्यानयन्ति । कार्यशरीरस्यातिपाते यः कश्चित् साक्षी । यत् कार्यम् अनुष्ठीयमानम् अतिपतत्य् उत्तरकालम् अशक्यानुष्ठानं तत्र साक्षिणां जातिलिङ्गवयःसादृश्यकसंबन्धाभावादिनियमो नास्ति । एतद् एवोत्तरेण दर्शयति ॥ ८.६९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*In the interior of a house*,’—any sudden act that may be committed, in
the shape of defamation or assault or incest or theft or other
crimes;—*in the forest*—if any of the said crimes are committed;—or when
the body is hurt by robbers or by other similar persons, and property is
robbed;—or when some one has stood security for a debt, but there are no
witnesses to it; or even though there were any, they could not wait till
the time of the trial;—or when the debt is repaid in private;—in all
such cases, any person ‘*who may be cognisant of the facts*’— who may
have witnessed the transaction in question,—there being no restriction
as to caste, or of similarity of standing and the like.

The phrase ‘*in the interior of a house’ stands* lor a secluded place in
general; so that uninhabited temples and such places also become
included. The mention of the ‘*forest*’ also indicates the same thing.

Others have explained the clause ‘*śarīrasyāpi vātyaye*’ to mean ‘when
the entire structure of the case is going to fall through, any man can
be cited as a witness’; *i.e*., when a case having been instituted is
going to fall through, and there is no chance Of its being
re-instituted, then there should be no restriction as to the caste, or
sex, or age, or rank or relationship and the like. This is what is
further explained in the following verse.—(69)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 671), which adds that
‘*anubhāvi*’ means an *eye-witness*, one who has actually seen the
occurrence;—in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 214);—in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Vyavahāra, p. 181), which explains’ ‘*anubhāvi*’ as ‘one conversant
with the facts of the case’;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (3a), which explains
‘*anubhāvi*’ as ‘one who has had *anubhāva*, experience’;—and in
‘*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 51a), which has the same explanation of
‘*anubhāvi*.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.29).—‘Men of any caste may give evidence regarding men of
any caste.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.69).—(See under 68.)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अतिपातिनि कार्ये ऽन्तर्वेश्मादिष्व् असदृशो ऽपि साक्ष्यं कुर्यात् । तथा च सति —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

069	But any person whatsoever, who has personal knowledge (of an act committed) in the interior apartments (of a house), or in a forest, or of (a crime causing) loss of life, may give evidence between the parties.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/070_striyApy_asambhAve.md">
<details open><summary><h3>070 स्त्रियाप्य् असम्भावे ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

स्त्रियाप्य् असंभावे कार्यं  
बालेन स्थविरेण वा ।  
शिष्येण बन्धुना वापि  
दासेन भृतकेन वा  ॥ ८.७० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/070_striyApy_asambhAve.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the event of (proper witnesses) not forthcoming, evidence may be given by a woman, by a minor, by an aged person, by a pupil, by a relative, by a slave, or by a servant.—(70)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**स्त्रियेति** लिङ्गव्यत्यय उक्तः । **बालेन स्थविरेण वेति** वयोव्यत्ययः । **शिष्येणे**त्यादिना संबन्धिनः प्रतिप्रसवः । एतच् च प्रदर्शनम् एवंविधानां नियमानां व्यभिचाराय । तेन जातिसादृश्ये[^२७०] ऽपि नाद्रियेते । सुहृद्वैरिदृष्टदोषादयस् तु नेष्यन्ते । येषां किंचिद् असत्याभिधानकरणत्वं दृष्टं नापि व्यापकं[^२७१] ते न प्रतिसूयन्ते । येषां तु बहुव्यापकं क्वचिद् एव गुणातिशयं चेति व्यभिचरेत् ततः क्वचिद् एव तत्साक्षिणः । उक्तं च ।


[^२७१]:
     M G DK: nātivyāpakaṃ


[^२७०]:
     M G DK (1.259): jñātisādṛśye

- एकः सहस्राल् लभ्येत न सौहार्दान् न शात्रवात् ।

- नार्थसंबन्धतो वापि पुरुषो ऽनृतम् आचरेत् ॥ इति ।

- असंभवे ऽन्येषां साक्षिणां स्त्रियापि कार्यम् । किम् । साक्ष्यम् इति पूर्वश्लोकाद् अनुषज्यते । **शिष्येणेति** मौखस्रौवसंबन्धप्रदर्शनार्थम्[^२७२] एतत् । **बन्धुनेति** अहार्योत्पत्तिकायौनसंबन्धप्रतिप्रसवः[^२७३] । सत्य् अपि संबन्धत्वे यो नातिप्रत्यासन्नः स गृह्यते । तेन भ्रातृव्यमातुलश्वशुर्यादयो न साक्षिणः । तथाविधे हि बन्धुशब्दो रूढः । **दासेनेति** स्वस्वामिसंबन्ध उपलक्ष्यते । न स्वाम्य् उपाध्यायो याजकश् च सर्वंविधे विषये साक्षिणः । **दासो** गर्भदासः । **भृतको** वैतनिकः[^२७४] । 


[^२७४]:
     M G: vaitānikaḥ


[^२७३]:
     M G: ahāryotpattikāyānasaṃbandha-; J: ahāryotpattikāyādisaṃbandha-


[^२७२]:
     J: maukhaśrauta-

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु चासामर्थ्याद् बालादयः साक्षित्वे निरस्ताः । न ह्य् एते साक्ष्यम् अवधारयितुं शक्नुवन्ति बुद्धेर् अस्थैर्यात् परिपाकादिभिर् दोषैस् तद् आपदि प्रतिप्रसूयमानसमञ्जसम् इति, न ह्य् आपदि शक्तिर् अस्याविर्भवति । यो हि ब्रूयात् "न वा[^२७५] नवौदनः पक्तव्यः; सत्य् अग्नौ तु पक्तव्यः" इति तादृग् एतत् स्यात् । 


[^२७५]:
     M G DK: tena vā

<u>नैष दोषः</u> । एवम् अर्थम् एवोत्तरश्लोक आरभ्यते ॥ ८.७० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The mention of ‘*woman*’ thus permits departure from the rule laying
down the sex of the witness; that of ‘*minor*’ and ‘*aged person*’ that
prescribing his age; and that of ‘*pupil*’ makes an exception in favour
of relations in general;—this being mentioned only by way of
illustration, indicating the admissibility of persons similarly
circumstanced; hence the restrictions regarding caste or position also
are not to be strictly observed. But dear friends, or enemies or persons
of proved dishonesty.are not admissible in any case; nor any one in whom
there is suspicion of the presence of motives for telling a lie, or
those who have been found to be unreliable. Those however who have been
found to be only slightly unreliable, but otherwise endowed with
superior qualifications, may, in some cases, serve as witnesses. On this
point we have the following assertion—‘There may be one man among a
thousand who would not tell a lie, under the influence of friendship or
enmity or some other interested motive.’

In the event of other witnesses not forthcoming, *even a woman* ‘*may
give evidence*,’—this clause being construed from the preceding verse.

‘*Pupil*’—indicates tutorial and sacerdotal relationship in general.

‘*Relative*’—this term makes an exception in favour of what cannot be
avoided; the sense being that even though the man may bear some
relationship to the parties, if he is not very nearly related, he may be
admitted. Hence the cousin, the uncle, the brother-in-law and such other
near relatives should not he made witnesses, the name ‘relative’ being,
in ordinary usage, applicable to these persons.

‘*Slave*’—indicates the relation of *ownership* in general; that is why
the master, the teacher and the priest are not to be made witnesses in
any kind of suit. The term ‘*slave*’ stands for the born slave and
‘*servant*’ for one who serves on wages.

“The minor and others have been excluded on the ground of
incapacity,—they are incapable of realising what is *evidence*, because
of their mind being fickle and undeveloped; so that any exception in
their favour, oven in connection with emergencies, cannot he right. For
certainly even in an emergency they do not acquire the right capacity.
In fact, such an exception would he similar to the case where a man
having said ‘fresh rice shall not he cooked,’ adds ‘but if there is no
fire it shall be cooked?’

There is no force in this objection; as it is in view of these
considerations that we have the next verse.—(70)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This rule refers to the cases contemplated in the preceding verse
(Govindarāja and Kullūka),—‘to the last of these cases only’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 671), which adds that the women
and others mentioned here to be admissible as witnesses should be
understood to be only such as are free from the disqualifications of
being prejudiced or wickedly inclined and so forth.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 214);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 70);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 181);—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (32a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.70-72)**

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, pp. 670-671).—‘In cases of disobedience of the
royal edict, of adultery, of violent crimes, of theft and of
assaults,—one should not be particular regarding the admissibility of
witnesses. In the case of occurrences within a house, or at night, or
outside the village, if a suit is brought forward, the King shall not be
very particular regarding the admissibility of witnesses.’

*Uśanas* (Aparārka, pp. 670-671).—‘A slave, a blind man, a deaf man,
women, children, very aged persons and others,—if they are not connected
with the parties—may he witnesses in the case of crimes of violence. All
those persons who have been declared to he incompetent witnesses may he
admitted as witnesses according to the gravity of the case. But even so
a child, or a single person, or a woman, or forger, or a relative or an
enemy should not be admitted; as they would he found to depose falsely;
the child would do it through ignorance, the woman through inherent
untruthfulness, the forger by reason of his being a habitual wrong-doer,
the relations through their affection, and the enemy as a means of
revenge.’

*Gautama* (13.9).—‘There can be no objection against any witness in a
case of criminal hurt.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.6).—‘In cases of theft, of violence, abuse and assault, and
of adultery, the competence of witnesses should not be examined too
strictly.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.72).—‘All persons may be witnesses in cases of
adultery, of theft, of assault and of violent crimes.’

*Nārada* (1.189).—‘In cases of heinous crime, or robbery, or adultery,
or one of the two kinds of assault, he should not enquire too strictly
into the character of the witnesses.’

*Nārada* (1.188).—‘Slaves, impostors and other incompetent witnesses
enunciated shall nevertheless be witnesses in suits of especially grave
character.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सादृश्यापवादार्थः एवं च सति यथा स्त्र्यादीनां सादृश्याभावे ऽप्य् असदृशा एव क्वचिद् भवन्ति, एवं बालादीनाम् अपि क्वचिद् विवादे साक्षित्वं विज्ञेयं प्रतिषिद्धानाम् अपि सताम् । उक्तेभ्यश् च बालादिभ्यो ऽत्र श्लोके ये ऽप्य् अनुक्ताः प्रतिषिद्धाश् च तेषाम् अपि प्रतिप्रसवो निर्देशनार्थत्वाद् बालानां विज्ञेयः । ननु च कारणतः प्रतिषिद्धानां बालादीनां साक्षित्वे पुनस् तेषाम् उपदेशो न न्याय्यः । प्रतिषेधकारणस्यावस्थितत्वाद् इति ॥ ८.७० ॥

_यत् इदम् अनुमानं तद् विशुद्ध्यर्थम् आह-_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

070	On failure (of qualified witnesses, evidence) may given (in such cases) by a woman, by an infant, by an aged man, by a pupil, by a relative, by a slave, or by a hired servant.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/071_bAla-vRddhAturANA~n_cha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>071 बाल-वृद्धातुराणाञ् च ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

बाल-वृद्धातुराणां च  
साक्ष्येषु वदतां मृषा ।  
जानीयाद् अस्थिरां वाचम्  
उत्सिक्त-मनसां तथा  ॥ ८.७१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/071_bAla-vRddhAturANA~n_cha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the event of minors, aged and diseased persons deposing falsely in their evidence, the Judge should make up his mind regarding the speech being irregular; so also in the case of men with disordered minds.—(71)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अयम् अस्यार्थः । नेहात्यन्ताप्राप्तनिबद्धभ्रान्तबुद्धयो बालादयो गृह्यन्ते येनारभ्यो ऽर्थ उपदिष्टः स्यात् । किं तु ये शक्नुवन्त्य् अवधारयितुं न चातिस्थिरचेतसस् तेभ्यः अनुज्ञायन्ते । तेषां वचनम् अनुमानेन परीक्ष्यम् । यदि संबद्धं वदन्ति न च खलन्ति न शङ्क्यमानदोषेण केनचित् संगतास् ततः प्रमाणं । तद् आह तेषां **मृषा वदताम् अस्थिरां वाचं जानीयात्** । एतद् उक्तं भवति । वाचो ऽस्थैर्येण मृषात्वं निश्चिनुयात् । तत्र वाचो ऽस्थैर्यं पदानाम् इतरेतरम् असंगतिः, अस्फुटापरिपूर्णाक्षरत्वं च । एतच् च बालादीनाम् अवस्थोपलक्षणार्थम् । ये च वयसा व्याधिना वाप्य् अवस्थाम् इयतीं गता यद् अन्यद् विवक्षन्तो ऽन्यद् उच्चारयन्ति तच् चाव्यक्तं न ते साक्षिणः । एतत् प्रत्यक्षवेद्यम् असाक्षित्वकारणम् । अन्यत् तु रागद्वेषधनलोभादिसाधारणम् अनुमानतः परीक्ष्यम् । तच् चोक्तम् एव । **उत्सिक्तचेतसः** प्रकृत्यैवोपप्लुता अधीरधियः ॥ ८.७१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The meaning of this is as follows:—

The present verse is not meant to admit such minors and others as are
either in absolute bondage or with disordered minds,—and hence entirely
inadmissible. If it did so, it would be laying down something wholly
new. The persons indicated by this as admissible are, in fact, those who
are capable of understanding things, but whose minds are not quite
steady. And what is meant is that the words of such persons should be
fully examined with the help of reasonings, and they should be admitted
as reliable only if it is found that they speak coherently and are not
tainted with any suspicious signs of corruption. This is what is meant
by the words—*In the event of their deposing falsely the judge should
make up his mind regarding the speech being irregular*. That is to say,
the falsity of the deposition should be deduced from its
*irregularity*;—this ‘*irregularity*’ consisting in the *incoherence of
the statements* and *the absence of explicitness and clear utterance*.

All this is meant to indicate the condition of the minor and other
persons; the meaning being that those who have been reduced, either by
age or by disease, to a condition in which desiring to say one thing
they utter something quite different, and that also indistinctly, should
not be made witnesses. This ground for inadmissibility as witness can
always be ascertained by direct perception; the other grounds,—such as
the presence of love or hatred or avarice and so forth,—can be found out
only by investigation; as has been already declared.

‘*So also* *in the cate* *of* *men with disordered minds*,’—*i.e*.,
those who are inherently of unsound mind.—(71)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Nandana is misrepresented by Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 196), which
explains ‘*Utsiktamanasām*’ as ‘impatient’;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(32b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.70-72)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.70].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

केन । सत्यानृतवचनविभागार्थेनानुमानेन, उक्तं च "बाह्यैर् विभावयेल् लिङ्गैः" इत्यादि, "यथा नयत्य् असृक्पातैः" इति च । एवं चानुमानोपदेश इदमर्थो भवति । यदि यथोक्तानां साक्षिणाम् असंभवे साहसादिषु प्रतिषिद्धा अपि साक्षिणो भवन्त्य् अनुमानेन विशोध्यन्ते, अप्रतिषिद्धाश् च कदाचित् । एवं च सति —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

071	But the (judge) should consider the evidence of infants, aged and diseased men, who (are apt to) speak untruly, as untrustworthy, likewise that of men with disordered minds.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/072_sAhaseShu_cha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>072 साहसेषु च ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

साहसेषु च सर्वेषु  
स्तेय-संग्रहणेषु च ।  
वाग्-दण्डयोश् च पारुष्ये  
न परीक्षेत साक्षिणः  ॥ ८.७२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/072_sAhaseShu_cha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In all cases of violence, of theft and adultery, and of assault, verbal and corporeal,—he shall not investigate the character of the witnesses.—(72)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सहो बलम्, तद् आश्रित्य यत् क्रियते तत् **साहसम्** । राजवाल्ल्भ्येन महापक्षतया स्वशरीरबलेन बलवदाश्रयेण वा यद् अकार्यकरणं तत् **साहसम्**, यथा[^२७६] वस्त्रपाटनाग्निदाहकेशछेदादि । अन्यत् प्रसिद्धम् । अत्र साक्षिणो न परीक्ष्याः । "गृहिणः पुत्रिणः" (म्ध् ८.६२) इत्य् एवमादिरूपपरीक्षात्र प्रतिषिध्यते । या तु व्यभिचारहेतुतया शङ्क्यते रागद्वेषधनलोभादिरूपा सा कर्तव्यैव । दृष्टमूलत्वाद् अस्याः स्मृतेर् इत्य् उक्तम् ॥ ८.७२ ॥


[^२७६]:
     J: tathā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Sāhasa*,’ ‘*violence*’;—‘*taha*’ means ‘*force*’; and what is done *by
force* is ‘*sāhasa*,’ ‘*violence*’; whenever an improper act is done by
a man, either on the strength of his being the king’s favourite, or of
his having a large following, or of his own bodily strength, or of the
help of some powerful person,—it is called ‘*sāhasa*,’ ‘*violence*.’
*e.g*., the tearing of cloths, the burning by fire, the cutting of the
hands, and so forth.

The rest are all well known.

In such oases the character of the witnesses need not be
investigated;—this precludes the investigation that has been laid down
above, under verse 60, *et seq*.; that investigation, on the other hand,
which bears upon doubt regarding the man’s reliability, on account of
the presence of love, hatred, avarice and the like,—that must be done.
The placing of this limitation upon what is laid down in the text is
justified by the consideration that the present treatise is known to
have a visible source, in the person of a personal author; as has been
explained before.—(72)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (32a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 50b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.70-72)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.70].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

वस्त्रपाटनोल्कादहनकेशछेदनादिष्व् अप्रत्ययकारी पुरुषः क्रोधचापलप्रभवेषु । स्तेयादीनि प्रसिद्धानि । एवमादिषु न परीक्षेत साक्षिणम्, "गृहिणः पुत्रिणः" इत्य् एवमादिना लक्षणेन । अर्थसंबन्धादिभिस् तु सामर्थ्यात् परीक्ष्या एव "अनुमानेन" । प्रतिषिद्धा अपि सन्तः परीक्ष्या एव साक्षिणो ऽनुमानतः । एवं चानुमानोपदेष्(श्?)ओ ऽत्रार्थवान् भवतीत्य् उक्तः । यत्र पुनः साक्षिणां समगुणानां विप्रतिपत्तिः, तत्र —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

072	In all cases of violence, of theft and adultery, of defamation and assault, he must not examine the (competence of) witnesses (too strictly).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/073_bahutvam_parigRhNIyAt.md">
<details open><summary><h3>073 बहुत्वम् परिगृह्णीयात् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

बहुत्वं परिगृह्णीयात्  
साक्षिद्वैधे नराधिपः ।  
समेषु तु गुणोत्कृष्टान्  
गुणिद्वैधे द्विजोत्तमान्  ॥ ८.७३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/073_bahutvam_parigRhNIyAt.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

On a conflict among witnesses, the king shall accept the majority; in the case of equality (of number) those possessed of superior qualifications; and in the case of conflict between equally qualified witnesses, the best among the twice-born.—(73)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यत्र भूमिभागादौ विप्रतिपत्तिर् द्वाभ्यां च भोगसाधनं साक्षिणो निर्दिष्टाः । ते अ केचिद् अर्थिनो भोगम् आहुर् अपरे प्रत्यर्थिनः । तत्र बहूनां वचनं ग्राह्यम् । समसंख्येषु तु ये गुणैर् उत्कृष्टा बहुगुणा इत्य् अर्थः । एकेन वा गुणेन दृष्टपुरुषार्थोपकारिणा[^२७७] सातिशयेन युक्ताः । गुणवतां समगुणानां भेदे जातिर् आदर्तव्या । सर्वसाम्ये शपथः । अन्यद् वा तत्समानम्[^२७८] ।


[^२७८]:
     M G: anumāne; DK ( 1:271): pramāṇaṃ anumānam


[^२७७]:
     M G: dṛṣṭe

**बहुत्वं परिगृह्णीयात्** । बहूनां वचनं प्रमाणीकुर्यात् । **द्वैधं** परस्परविरुद्धार्थाभिधानम् ॥ ८.७३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In a dispute over the possession of land, *eg*., when several witnesses
have been cited in proof of possession, if some depose to possession by
the plaintiff, while others to that of the defendant,—then the king
shall accept the statement of the majority.

When the number on both sides are equal, he shall Accept the statement
of those ‘*possessed of superior qualifications*,’—*i.e*., of a larger
number of qualities, or of a single quality, but in a very large degree,
very much to the benefit of mankind.

When there is a conflict between two equally qualified witnesses,
preference has to be given to the higher caste.

Lastly, when both sets are equal in all respects, then recourse should
he had to ordeals, or some other similar means of discrimination.

‘*Accept the majority*’—*i.e*., accept as true the statement of the
majority.

‘*Conflict*’—making contradictory statements.—(73)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Dvijottamān*’—Brāhmaṇas’ (Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa;—‘righteous
Brāhmaṇas’ (Kullūka and Raghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 211);—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (32a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (8.39).—‘If there is contradictory evidence, let the King decide
by the majority of witnesses; if there is equality in number, by
superiority in virtue; if there is parity in virtue, by the evidence of
the best among the twice-born.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.78, 80).—‘When there is contradiction, the evidence of
the majority should be accepted; when the number of witnesses is equal
on both sides, then the evidence of those better qualified should he
accepted; when there is contradiction among witnesses equally qualified,
the evidence of those should be accepted who are possessed of the best
qualifications. Even after the witnesses have deposed, if other
witnesses, either better qualified or in larger numbers, come forward to
depose to the contrary, the former witnesses should be rejected as
false.’

*Nārada* (1.229).—‘When there is conflicting evidence, the majority of
witnesses decides the matter. If the number of witnesses is equal on
both sides, the testimony of those should be accepted as correct whose
veracity is not liable to suspicion. If the number of such witnesses is
equal on both sides, the testimony of those should be accepted who are
possessed of a superior memory.’

*Bṛhaspati* (7.35).—‘In a conflict among witnesses, the testimony of the
majority should be accepted; when the number is equal on both sides, the
testimony of the more virtuous ones; when the virtuous witnesses are
divided, the testimony of those specially eminent for the performance of
righteous acts; whenever those are divided, the testimony of those
endowed with superior memory.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

विधिविप्रतिपत्ताव् एष एव न्यायः । अनुमाने यथोक्ते, क्वचिच् च शपथाद्य् अपि वक्ष्यति- "असाक्षिकेषु त्व् अर्थेषु । । । शपथेनापि लम्भयेत्" इति । अपि च "जागर्ति भगवान् धर्मः" । स एव साम्ये ऽपि सति केनचित् कारणेनात्मानं दर्शयति । **द्विजोत्तमान्** इति चेदं लिङ्गं ब्राह्मणानां साक्षित्वे तथा चोक्तम् "आप्ताः सर्वेषु वर्णेषु" इति । न चैतद् उक्तवर्णानुवादार्थं **सर्व**ग्रहणम् । किं तर्हि ब्राह्मणवर्णावबोधार्थम् । तथा च कृत्वैवमादीनि लिङ्गानि श्रोत्रियप्रतिषेधस्य ॥ ८.७३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

073	On a conflict of the witnesses the king shall accept (as true) the evidence of the) majority; if (the conflicting parties are) equal in number, (that of) those distinguished by good qualities; on a difference between (equally) distinguished (witnesses, that of) the best among the twice-born.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/074_samaxadarshanAt_sAxyam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>074 समक्षदर्शनात् साक्ष्यम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

समक्षदर्शनात् साक्ष्यं  
श्रवणाच् चैव सिध्यति ।  
तत्र सत्यं ब्रुवन् साक्षी  
धर्मार्थाभ्यां न हीयते  ॥ ८.७४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/074_samaxadarshanAt_sAxyam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Evidence based upon what is directly seen and is heard is admissible; and a witness, telling the truth in such cases, does not fall off from spiritual merit or worldly prosperity.—(74)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>
<u>ननु</u> च "अनुभावी तु यः कश्चित्" (म्ध् ८.६९) इत्य् अनेनोक्तम् एवैतत्, कथं चान्यथासिद्धिर् आशङ्क्यते येनेदम् उच्यते दर्शनश्रवणाभ्यां साक्ष्यसिद्धिर् इति । 

<u>अत्रोच्यते</u> । साक्षी व्यवहरिष्यता कर्तव्यः "त्वं मे साक्षी भविष्यसि" इत्य् उक्तम् । तत्र य एवम् अनुक्तः[^२७९] स न प्राप्नोति । एवम् अर्थम् इदम् उच्यते । यस् तत्रे संनिहितः कथंचिद् अनुभविता त्वं स्मर्तुम् अर्हस्य् अवयोर् अमुम् अर्थम् इत्य् एवम् अनुक्ते ऽपि भवत्य् एव साक्षी । **समक्षदर्शनात्** साक्षाद् अनुभावाच् **छ्रवणाच् च** । समक्षशब्दानुषङ्गः कर्तव्यः । यत् कुतश्चिद् एकेन श्रूयते ततो ऽन्येन तत् परंपराश्रुतं तेन परंपराश्रावी न साक्षी । यथैतेनेदम् अकार्यं कृतम् इदम् अस्मै वा धारयतीति लोकप्रसिद्ध्यागतम्, न तु प्रमाणतः । तत्र समक्षदर्शनं साक्षाद् अनुभवनम् अर्थविषयम् ऋणप्रयोगदण्डपारुष्यादि साक्षाद् दृष्टं चक्षुर्व्यापारेण वाक्पारुष्यं तथेदम् अस्मान् मया गृहीतम् इत्य् एवमादिविषयं शब्दश्रवणम् । यद्य् अपि दृशिर् उपलब्धिमात्रवचनः तथापि[^२८०] वृत्तानुरोधितया श्रोत्रज्ञानं श्रवणं भेदेनोपात्तम् । एतावच् चात्र विवक्षितम् । प्रंआणतो येनानुभूतं स साक्षी । समक्षशब्दग्रहणं प्रमाणमात्रोपलक्षणार्थम् । तेनानुमानादिनाप्य् अनुभूतम् अनुभूतम् एव । अत आप्तागमाच् छ्रुतम् अप्रत्यक्षम् अपि प्रमाणम् । उत्तरस् तु श्लोकार्धो ऽनुवाद एव, सत्यवचनस्य विहितत्वात्, असत्यवादिनो धर्मार्थहानेश् च प्रमाणान्तरावगतत्वात् ॥ ८.७४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

“It has already been said (under 69) that evidence may be given by any
person who may be ‘cognisant of the facts of the case’; why then should
any inadmissibility be suspected, in view of which it is now said that
evidence on the basis of what is seen and heard is admissible?”

Our answer is as follows:—It has been said that the witness shall be
warned by the person who he is going to file his suit, saying—‘you shall
be my witness’; so that people might think that if a person has not been
so warned, he shall be inadmissible; it is in view of this that the
present declaration has been made. The meaning is that if a person
happens to be close by when a certain transaction is being gone through
and is cognisant of the facts, he is admissible as a witness, even
though ho may not have been warned by the parties, saying ‘you will
please bear in mind this transaction between us.’

The term ‘directly’ has to be construed with ‘*what, is seen*’ as also
with ‘*what is heard*’; so that if some one bears of a fact from one
person, and from the former some one else hears it, then the person who
has heard of it at second hand is not admissible as a witness; as it is
only on hearsay, and not on the basis of any direct source of knowledge,
that the man would know that ‘this man has committed such and such a
crime,’ or that ‘he owes such and such a sum to that man.’

‘*What is directly seen*’—means direct knowledge of the facts of the
case, bearing upon loan-transactions, assaults and so forth; *i.e*.,
when these occurrences are actually wen with the eye; or ‘*directly
heard*’ in the case of *verbal assaults*,—such as ‘I shall take away
your wife,’ and so forth,—and such admissions by the debtor as that ‘I
have borrowed such and such a sum from that man,’ and so forth.

Though the root ‘*dṛśi*,’ ‘to see,’ denotes all forms of *apprehension*
(and as such includes auditory perception also), yet ‘*what is heard*’
has been mentioned separately for the purpose of filling up the metro.
All that is meant is that ‘a person who has a right knowledge of the
facts is admissible as a witness’; and the phrase ‘*what is seen*’ is
meant to stand for all valid kinds of knowledge; so that what is known
by inference is also regarded as ‘known’; similarly also all trustworthy
Revelation, which is an authoritative means of knowledge in regard to
imperceptible things also.

The second half of the verse is merely re-iterative, the telling of
truth having been already enjoined before, and the fact of the liar
losing both spiritual merit and worldly prosperity being already known
from other sources of know ledge.—(74)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vyavahāratattva* (p. 26);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(27a), which says that ‘*samakṣadarśana*’ and ‘*śravaṇa*’ stand for all
forms of valid knowledge, hence the meaning is that that man is a
*witness* who possesses a right knowledge of the subject-matter of the
enquiry;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 44b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bodhāyana* (1.19.7).—‘In order to gain the good opinion of men, a
witness shall give evidence in accordance with what he has seen or
heard.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.13-14).—‘The evidence of witnesses is of two kinds—what was
seen and what was heard. Witnesses are free from blame if they give true
evidence.’

*Nārada* (1.148).—‘He should he considered as a witness who has
witnessed a deed with his own ears or eyes; with his ears, if he has
heard another man speaking; with his eyes, if he has seen something
himself.’

*Bṛhaspati* (7.8-13).—‘That witness is denominated a *messenger* who is
a respectable man, esteemed and appointed by both parties, and has come
near them to listen to the speeches of the plaintiff and the defendant.
He is a *spontaneous* witness who declares that he has witnessed the
transaction, after having approached the court of his own accord, while
a cause is being heard. That witness who communicates to another man
what he has heard, at a time when he is about to go abroad, or is lying
on his death-bed, should he considered as an *indirect* witness. He also
is called an *indirect* witness who repeats, from his own hearing or
from hearsay, the previous statements of actual witnesses. He is called
a *secret* witness to whom an affair has been entrusted or communicated
by both parties, or who happens to witness the transaction. The King
himself, having heard the statements of both the Plaintiff and the
Defendant, may act as a witness.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

दर्शनश्रवणाभ्यां साक्षित्वसिद्धिः, न तु निबन्धनतः । अतो ऽन्तरेणापि निबन्धनं साक्षी स्याद् एव । एतावांस् तु साक्षिणो नियमः । निबन्धेनापि पृष्टेन सता सत्यं वक्तव्यम् इति । येन —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

074	Evidence in accordance with what has actually been seen or heard, is admissible; a witness who speaks truth in those (cases), neither loses spiritual merit nor wealth.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/075_sAxI_dRShTa-shrutAd.md">
<details open><summary><h3>075 साक्षी दृष्ट-श्रुताद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

साक्षी दृष्ट-श्रुताद् अन्यद्  
विब्रुवन्न् आर्यसंसदि ।  
अवाङ् नरकम् अभ्येति  
प्रेत्य स्वर्गाच् च हीयते  ॥ ८.७५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/075_sAxI_dRShTa-shrutAd.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A witness asserting, in an assembly of noble men, anything apart from what he has seen and heard, falls downwards into hell after death and becomes shut out from heaven.—(75)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

असत्याभिधाने साक्षिणां फलदर्शनार्थम् इदम् । **दृष्टश्रुत**शब्द उपलब्धिपर्याय इत्य् उक्तम् । तस्माद् **अन्यद्** अनुपलब्धम् । तच् चेद् ब्रवीति । **आर्याः** सभ्याः सम्यक्कारिणः । तेषां **संसदि** सभायाम् **अवाङ्** अधोमुखः **नरकं**[^२८१] यामं यातनास्थानं[^२८२] गच्छति । **प्रेत्य** मृत्वा **स्वर्गाच् च हीयते** भ्रश्यति । यद् अप्य् अनेन स्वर्गारोहणिकं कर्म कृतं तद् अपि कौटसाक्ष्यपापस्य गुरुत्वात् प्रतिबध्यते । न तु स्वर्गस्य कर्मणः पापेनान्येन नाशः । स्वफलविधित्वात् कर्मणाम् अन्यत्र प्रायश्चित्तेभ्यः ॥ ८.७५ ॥


[^२८२]:
     J: yamayātanāsthānaṃ


[^२८१]:
     J add: yāti
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The present verse describes the results accruing to the witness who
deposes falsely.

The term ‘seen and heard’ is synonymous with ‘apprehended,’ as has been
already explained; ‘*apart from this*’ is what *is not apprehended*, or
known to him;—if he asserts any such thing, ‘*in an assembly of noble
men*,’—in the court consisting of honourable persons,—he ‘*falls
downwards*’—headlong—‘*into hell*’—to a place where he undergoes
punishments at the hands of the god Yama;—‘*after death*’—‘and *becomes
shut out from heaven*,’—*i.e*., falls down. That is, even though he may
have committed deeds entitling him to go to heaven, yet he becomes shut
out from it, by virtue of the more serious nature of the sin of perjury.
It is not that the ‘*Karma*’ calculated to carry him to heaven is
destroyed by this sin; since every act is conducive to the fulfilment of
its own reward (and does not interfere with that of others), with the
sole exception of the Expiatory Rites (which have no results of their
own, and only tend to nullify those of the corresponding sinful
acts).—(75)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Saṃsadi*’—‘In the Court’ (Medhātithi);—‘in an assembly of Brāhmaṇas’
(Govindarāja).

‘*Svargāt hīyate*’—‘Falls off from heaven which he may have earned by
meritorious acts’ (Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Kullūka and Nandana);—‘even
after passing through hell, he cannot get into heaven’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 200);—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (38a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (13.7).—‘Heaven is the reward of witnesses, if they speak the
truth; in the contrary case, hell.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.19.14-15).—‘If the witness rightly recollects the facts
of the case, he will receive commendation from the most eminent men;—in
the contrary case, he will fall into hell.’

*Āpastamba* (2.29.9-10)—‘If he tells an untruth, hell will he his
punishment after death;—if he speaks the truth, his reward will be
heaven and the approbation of all beings.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.14).—‘Witnesses are free from blame, if they give true
evidence.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

न केवलं धर्मानुत्पत्त्या स्वर्गाद् धीयत इत्य् उक्तम् । अयं च पूर्वश्लोकशेष एवार्थवादः, तथा च संबन्धेन दर्शित एवायम् अर्थः । यतश् च दर्शनश्रवणाभ्यां साक्षित्वसिद्धिः, न निबन्धात् ॥ ८.७५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

075	A witness who deposes in an assembly of honourable men (Arya) anything else but what he has seen or heard, falls after death headlong into hell and loses heaven.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/076_yatrA-nibaddho.apIxeta.md">
<details open><summary><h3>076 यत्राऽनिबद्धो ऽपीक्षेत ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यत्राऽनिबद्धो ऽपीक्षेत  
शृणुयाद् वापि किं चन ।  
पृष्टस् तत्राऽपि तद् ब्रूयाद्  
यथादृष्टं यथाश्रुतम्  ॥ ८.७६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/076_yatrA-nibaddho.apIxeta.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Even though not put down as a witness, if a person happens to see or hear anything in regard to a case,—when he comes to be questioned about it, he should speak out exactly as he has seen or heard it.—(76)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>
<u>ननु</u> चोक्तं "समक्षदर्शनात्" (म्ध् ८.७४) इत्य् अत्र यथाकथंचिदनुभूतवतो ऽनियुक्तस्यापि साक्ष्यम् अस्तीति । तत्र किम् अनेन "यत्रानिबद्धो ऽपि" इति । को वा विशेषः । 

<u>उच्यते</u> । लेख्यारूढस्य व्यापारविशेषाद्युक्तं साक्षित्वं न पुनर् अनारूढस्य । आरोहणस्यानर्थक्यप्रसङ्गाद् उभयोः साक्षित्वे[^२८३] । अत एताम् आशङ्काम् अपनेतुम् इदम् उच्यते । पूर्वस् तु श्लोको यत्रानुकाः[^२८४] साक्षिणः । अयं तु यत्र ससाक्षिकं लेख्यम् ।  
**अनिबद्धो** लेक्यम् अनारूढो ऽपीत्य् अर्थः । ईक्षणश्रवणे व्याख्याते । शेषं सुबोधम् ॥ ८.७६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

“Under verso 74 it has been already declared that even though a man may
not have been originally appointed as a witness, his evidence, as
bearing upon what is directly known to him, is admissible; what then is
the use of saying again that ‘*even though not put down*, etc., etc.’?
What additional information is provided by this verse?

People might be led to think that—‘when a man has been put down as a
witness on the original document, his evidence is admissible as a matter
of course,—but not so that of one who has not been so put down,—for if
both were admissible, then there would be no point in entering any
witnesses upon the document.’ It is with a view to set aside this idea
that the author has added the present verse. The former verse refers to
cases where no witnesses have been put down, while this refers to a case
where the document is duly attested by witnesses.

‘*Not put down*’—not entered in the document.

‘*Seeing*’ and ‘*hearing*’ have been already explained.

The rest is clear.—(76)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Anibaddhaḥ*’—‘Not entered as a witness in the document’
(Medhātithi),‘—but accidentally present at the transaction’ (Kullūka,
Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Vyavahāratattva* (p. 26);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(28a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 46a), which explains
‘*anibaddhaḥ*’ as ‘not cited or entered.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (8.12).—‘An appointed witness having died or gone abroad, those
who have heard the tacts from him may give evidence.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.392).—‘A person present in court must depose truly as
to what he has seen or heard, when asked, even though he may not have
been cited as a witness.’

*Nārada* (1.161).—‘He who, without having been appointed to ho a
witness, comes of his own accord to make a deposition, is termed a *spy*
in the law-books; he is unworthy to bear testimony.’

Do. (1.166).—‘If a witness dies or goes abroad after having been
appointed, those who may have heard his statement may give evidence; for
indirect proof makes evidence.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उपसंहारार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.७६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

076	When a man (originally) not appointed to be a witness sees or hears anything and is (afterwards) examined regarding it, he must declare it (exactly) as he saw or heard it.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/077_eko.alubdhas.md">
<details open><summary><h3>077 एको ऽलुब्धस् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एको ऽलुब्धस् तु साक्षी स्याद्  
बह्व्यः शुच्यो ऽपि न स्त्रियः [मेधातिथिपाठः - त्व् असाक्षी] ।  
स्त्रीबुद्धेर् अस्थिरत्वात् तु  
दोषैश् चाऽन्ये ऽपि ये वृताः  ॥ ८.७७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/077_eko.alubdhas.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A single man, free from covetousness, may be a witness, but not many women, even though pure,—because the understanding of women is not steady,—nor other men who are tainted with defects.—(77)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**एकस्य** पुनः प्रतिषेधो लोभादिरहितस्य प्रतिप्रसवार्थः । तेन सत्यवादितया निश्चित एको ऽपि साक्षी भवत्य् एव । **स्त्रियस्** तु न कथंचित् साक्ष्यम् अर्हन्त्य् अल्पा वा **बह्व्यो** वा । **शुच्यो ऽपीति** गुणवत्यो ऽपीत्य् अर्थः । अत्र हेतुः- **स्त्रीबुद्धेर् अस्थिरत्वाद्** इति । प्रकृतिर् एषा स्त्रीणां यद् बुद्धेश् चापलम् । गुणास् तु यत्नोपार्जिता अपि प्रमादालस्यादिना व्यपयन्त्य् अतः स्वाभाविकम् अस्थैर्यं तिष्ठेद् एव । यथामयाविनो घृतादिनोत्पन्ने ऽप्य् अग्नेः स्थैर्ये स्वल्पेनापि प्रमादे पुनः सहजामयावितानुवृत्तिः । अतो ऽनया शङ्कया गुणवतीष्व् अपि तासु नाश्वासः । यत् तु "स्त्रियाप्य् असंभवे कार्यम्" (म्ध् ८.७०) इति तद् यत्र तत्क्षणाद् एव पृच्छ्यन्ते । यत्रेयम् आशङ्का न भवति केनचिद् आसां संचलितं मन इति । यत्र तु कालव्यवधानं तत्र जीयमानेन कदाचिद् अनुकूल्यन्ते इति न क्वचित् साक्षिन्यः ।

**दोषैश् चान्ये ऽपि ये वृताः** । रोगादिभिर् **दोषैर्** **ये** स्त्रीभ्यो **ऽन्ये ऽपि** पुरुषा **वृता** आक्रान्ता भूयिष्ठदोषा इत्य् अर्थः । के पुनर् अमी दोषा नाम । उक्तं च । रागादयः शास्त्रप्रतिषिद्धाः शङ्क्यमानव्यभिचारहेतुभावाः । यद्य् अपि केवलेन स्वशब्देनैवोक्ता दोषाः तथाप्य् अनुक्तपरिग्रहार्थम् इदम् अपुनरुक्तम् । सामान्यविशेषाभिधानं हि सर्वत्र ग्रन्थकारा अनुमन्यन्ते । 


- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये त्व् अकारप्रश्लेषेण "अलुब्धो ऽप्य् एको न साक्षी" किं पुनर् लुब्ध इत्य् एवम् आचक्षते । तथा च द्वयोर् अभ्यनुज्ञानं भवति । 

शुच्य इतीकारो दुर्लभो "वोतो गुणवचनात्" (पाण् ४.१.४४) इति विधानात् । "कृदिकारात्"[^२८६] इति केचित् समर्थयन्ते ॥ ८.७७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The evidence of a single person having been declared to be inadmissible,
the present verse lavs down an exception in favour of one who is free
from covetousness. So that if a man is known to be truthful, he is
certainly admissible as witness. But women are never admissible,—be they
one or many,—‘*even though pure*’—possessed of high qualifications; and
the reason for this is that ‘*the understanding of women is not
steady*’; fickle-mindedness is the very nature of women; while other
qualifications are acquired, and as such liable to lapses through
carelessness, idleness and so forth; so that their inherent fickleness
remains as a constant factor. Just as in the case of a dyspeptic,—even
though a certain amount of appetite may have been regained by the use of
butter and other things, yet even the least neglect on their part,
brings on the inherent Dyspepsia again. Consequently, on account of this
uncertainty, there can be no confidence in women, even though they be
highly qualified.

As for the declaration (in 70) that ‘in the event of no witnesses being
available, women may be made witnesses,’—that refers to cases where they
can be immediately questioned, and there is no possibility of their mind
being tampered with by any person. When however there has been an
interval of time, it is quite possible that they may be won over by the
party whoso case is weak and who is in fear of losing it. So that in
such cases their evidence is not admissible at all.

‘*Other men tainted with defects*;—even persons other than women,—and
men,—who are ‘*tainted*’—beset—with such defects as love, hatred and so
forth; *i.e*., men in whom those defects abound to a every large extent.

Though Love, Hatred and the rest, as being forbidden by the scriptures,
have, already been declared by name to be sources of suspicion and
dishonesty,—yet they are referred to here again, for the purpose of
including those that have not been so mentioned by name, and all writers
sanction the mentioning of the general and special aspects of the same
tiling.

Some people have adopted the ‘*a*’ before ‘*lubdha*’ and construed the
verse to mean that ‘even though free from covetousness, a single man
cannot be a witness,—how much less then one who is covetous,’—and hence
as permitting the evidence of *two* men.

Though the form ‘*śucyaḥ*’ is impossible, in view of Pāṇini 4.1.44, yet
some people justify it as being in accordance with the *Vārtika* on
4.1.45—(77)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 213), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Eko’ lubdhastu sākṣī*’ is the reading adopted by
Kullūka Bhaṭṭa; the other reading—‘*eko lubdhastvasākṣī*’—adopted by
Jīmūtavāhana, is not right; because as a matter of fact, even several
*avaricious men* would be *asākṣī*, and hence there would be no point in
the term ‘*ekaḥ*.’ But admitting this reading, the verse could be taken
as not admitting the evidence of *one* ‘avaricious man’, and thereby
admitting that of *one* man who is free from avarice, even though he be
ignorant of law. It is for this reason that Viśvarūpa and others have
explained the meaning to be that when accepted by both parties, even a
single man may be admitted as witness, and they have not laid stress
upon the condition that he should be ‘conversant with law;—‘*Dośaiḥ*’
stands for *theft* and so forth.

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (32a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

\[*Vide* Texts under 64 *et seq*.\]

*Yājñavalkya* (2.72).—‘Even a single man may ho admitted as a witness,
by the consent of both parties, if he is versed in Dharma.’

*Nārada* (1.188).—‘Slaves, impostors and others described as
inadmissible as witnesses shall he witnesses in suits of a specially
grave character.’

*Nārada* (1.192).—‘By the consent of both parties, a single man may
become a witness in a suit. He must be examined in public as a
witness,—though he has been mentioned (in the Texts) as an incompetent
witness.’

Do. (1.190-191).—‘A woman cannot he a witness; a woman would speak
falsely from want of veracity.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एकस्य सत्य् अपि प्रतिषेधे गुणातिशयाद् अलुब्धस्याभ्यनुज्ञार्थम् इदम् । अपि चालुब्धः, अपीत्य् उभयत्रापि बोद्धव्यः । शुच्यो ऽपीत्य्- अयम् एव वालुब्धो ऽप्य् एको न साक्षी स्यात् । उत्तरविवषार्थश् चायम् आरम्भः । एवं स्त्रियो बह्व्यः शुच्यो ऽपि न स्युः, यथैको ऽलुब्धो ऽपि, तासां हि बुद्धेर् धर्मार्[थाभ्याम् अस्थिर]संबन्धः । व्याख्यानं शास्त्रविरोधान् नात्पेशलम्, यत् एकस्य लोभात् प्रतिषेधाद् वैतयोर् अलुब्धयोर् अभ्यनुज्ञानार्थम् इदम्, अन्यत्रापि च प्रतिषे[धस्य पुरुषस्त्री]तुल्यत्वात् । एवं च सति बह्व्यः शुच्यो ऽप्य् अलुब्धा अपि प्रकरणात् स्त्रियो न स्युः, स्त्रीबुद्धेर् अस्थिरत्वाद् इत्य् उक्तम् । दोषैर् नयैर् अपि ये वृताः पुरुषा अति[रिकत्वत् अलुब्धा अपि प्रतिषिध्यन्ते], किं पुनर् अन्यत्र । पुनर्वचनं चास्य यदर्थं तद् उक्तम् एवात्र ॥ ८.७७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

077	One man who is free from covetousness may be (accepted as) witness; but not even many pure women, because the understanding of females is apt to waver, nor even many other men, who are tainted with sin.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/078_svabhAvenaiva_yad.md">
<details open><summary><h3>078 स्वभावेनैव यद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

स्वभावेनैव यद् ब्रूयुस्  
तद् ग्राह्यं व्यावहारिकम् ।  
अतो यद् अन्यद् विब्रूयुर्  
धर्मार्थं तद् अपार्थकम्  ॥ ८.७८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/078_svabhAvenaiva_yad.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

What the witnesses state naturally, in relation to the case, should be accepted; apart from this what they state from considerations of righteousness, is useless.—(78)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

साक्षिणो यत् **स्वभावेन व्यावहारिकं** ब्रुवन्ति तद् ग्राह्यम् । यत् तु स्वभावाद् विचलितारुणया[^२८७] धर्मबुद्ध्या[^२८८] **धर्मार्थं ब्रूयुस् तद् अपार्थकम्** अग्राह्यम् इत्य् अर्थः । यद्यथादृष्टस्यार्थस्य[^२८९] वचनं तत् स्वभावतः । यत् त्व् अन्यथा "मा भूद् अस्य तपस्विनो मद्वचनेन बाधः" इत्य् अनया बुद्ध्या, **तद् अपार्थकम्** । यथा केनचिद् आवेदितं भवति "अनेनाह माक्रुष्टः" इति । तत्र परेणापह्नुतम् । साक्षिण आहुः- "सत्यम् आक्रुष्टः,[^२९०] नर्मणा[^२९१] न तु रोषेण"[^२९२] इति । तत्राकृउष्ट[^२९३] इत्य् एतत् साक्षिणां वचो ग्राह्यम् । नर्मेणेत्य्[^२९४] एतद् उत्तरवादिनानुक्तत्वाद् अपृष्टम् उक्तम् अपि न ग्राह्यम् । 


[^२९४]:
     M G DK: na karamaṇety


[^२९३]:
     M G DK: tatrākṛuṣṭaṃ


[^२९२]:
     M G: vyāroṣeṇa


[^२९१]:
     M G DK: na karmaṇā


[^२९०]:
     M G DK: ākruṣṭaṃ


[^२८९]:
     M G: yadyayathā-


[^२८८]:
     M G DK (1:269) add: strīpratyayam āśritya


[^२८७]:
     J: vicalitā

**व्यावहारिकं** व्यवहारगतम् । अपगतप्रयोजनम् **अपार्थकम्** । 


- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये व्याचक्षते । यद् अप्रगल्भादिभिः स्खलितपदम् उदाहरन्ति न तावता तद् अनादेयं किं तु स्वभाव एषाम् उपलक्षितव्यो ऽनुमानेन- किम् अमी अप्रागल्भ्यात् स्खलन्ति उतासत्याभिधायितयेति । 

<u>तत् तु</u> प्राग् उक्तम् । न चाक्षरार्थ इत्य् उपेक्ष्यम् ॥ ८.७८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What the witnesses state naturally in regard to the case should he
accepted; on the other hand, what they state, not quite naturally, but
‘*from considerations of righteousness*’ ‘*is useless*’,—*i.e*., should
not he accepted. The describing of things exactly as they were seen is
what is meant by ‘*natural statement* what is otherwise than
this,—*i.e*., what is stated with the motive that what is said may not
cause suffering to the poor party concerned,—‘*is useless*’; *e.g*.,
when one party complains—‘I have been insulted by this person’—and the
other denies it, the witness may say—‘yes, ho was insulted, but in joke,
not through malice’; and in this case, the statement ‘the man has been
insulted’ should he accepted; while the qualifying statement ‘in
joke,’—which had not been put forth by the defendant—and was made by the
witness unasked (gratuitously)—need not he accepted.

‘*In relation to the case*’—pertaining to the suit.

‘*Useless*’—futile.

Others explain the verse as follows:—It may so happen that through
shyness, a witness deposes in a halting manner,—but that alone need not
be made a ground for rejecting his statement; what is to be done is that
the nature of the witness should he examined by reasoning, and then it
should be determined that ‘this person speaks haltingly through shyness,
what he says, however, is quite true?

But the real meaning is as explained above; so much attention need not
be paid to this other explanation.—(78)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Svabhāvena*’—‘Quite naturally’—‘not out of compassion’ (Medhātithi,
who says nothing regarding ‘depending on women’ as Buhler wrongly puts
it),—‘not out of fear and the like’ (Kullūka);—‘the reliability or
otherwise of the witness is to be ascertained after due consideration of
his *Svabhāva*, character, and not from the manner of bis giving
evidence’ (‘others’ in Medhātithi),—‘without hesitation, quickly’
(Nārāyaṇa);—‘in accordance with truth’ (Govindarāja and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 80);—and in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 282).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Śukranīti* (4.5.396).—‘One should accept the evidence of witnesses
given spontaneously, not through force; after the evidence has been once
given by the witness, he shall not be repeatedly cross-examined.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

स्वभावेनेति सभायां] ग्रामिणाम् अन्येषां चाप्रागल्भ्याद् अप्रतिभानकम्पादयो जायन्ते । तेषां व्यावहारिकं ब्रुवतां स्वभाव उपलक्षयितव्यो ऽनुमानतः पुरुषशीलतो वा, किम् एषाम् अमी मिथ्यावचनकृताः कम्पादयः उताप्रागल्भ्याद् अनुचितमहाजनसमवायाद् वा । येन ह्य् अनुमानागम्यं कुंचिन् नास्ति । एवं धृष्टप्रागल्भ्यानाम् अपि स्वभावो ऽवधारणीयः ॥ ८.७८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

078	What witnesses declare quite naturally, that must be received on trials; (depositions) differing from that, which they make improperly, are worthless for (the purposes of) justice.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/079_sabhAntaH_sAxiNaH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>079 सभान्तः साक्षिणः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सभान्तः साक्षिणः प्राप्तान्  
अर्थि-प्रत्यर्थि-संनिधौ ।  
प्राड्विवाको ऽनुयुञ्जीत  
विधिनानेन सान्त्वयन्  ॥ ८.७९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/079_sabhAntaH_sAxiNaH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The investigating Judge shall question the witnesses assembled in the court, in the presence of the plaintiff and the defendant, gently exhorting them in the following manner.—(79)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सभायाम् अन्तः **सभान्तः** । शौण्डादित्वात् समासः (च्ड़्। पाण् २.१.४०) । व्यवहारदेशगता उभयोर् **अर्थिप्रत्यर्थिनोः** संनिधाने ऽनुयोक्तव्या वक्ष्यमाणेन विधिना । **सान्त्वयन्** अपरुषं ब्रुवन्[^२९५] । पारुष्येण हि प्राड्विवाकाद् बिभ्यतो ऽप्रकृतिस्था न[^२९६] सर्वं स्मरेयुः, संस्कारभ्रंशहेतुत्वाद् भयस्य । प्राड्विवाको राज्ञा व्यवहारदर्शनाधिकृतो रूढ्योच्यते । यद्य् अप्य् अवयवार्थो राजन्य् अपि संभवति। पृच्छति विविनक्तीति, तथापि[^२९७] भेदेन प्रयोगदर्शनम्- "अमात्यः प्राड्विवाको वा यः कुर्यात् कार्यम् अन्यथा" (म्ध् ९.२३४) इति । पृच्छतीति प्राट्, "क्विब्वचिप्रच्छिश्रिद्रुश्रुप्रुवां दीर्घो ऽसंप्रसारणं च" इति प्राट् । विशेषेण धर्मसंकटेषु विवेक्तीति विवाटः । "कृत्यल्युटो बहुलम्" (पाण् ३.३.११३) इति । कर्तरि घञ् । "चजोः कु घिण्ण्यतोः" (पाण् ७.३.५२) इति कुत्वम् । प्राट् चासौ विवाकश् च प्राड्विवाकः ॥ ८.७९ ॥


[^२९७]:
     M G: tathā ca


[^२९६]:
     M G: 'prakṛtisthānaṃ 


[^२९५]:
     M G omit: bruvan
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*In the court*’—inside the court room; the compounding being in
accordance with Pāṇini 2. 1.40;—those who have presented themselves at
the place of the trial; should he questioned ‘*in* *the presence of the
plaintiff and the defendant*’—both;—they being ‘*gently exhorted*’ in
the manner described below,—not addressed harshly; because if addressed
harshly, they would become frightened of the judge, and thereby losing
the normal condition of their mind, they would he unable to recall all
the details of the case; because fright always deprives people of their
memory.

‘*Prāḍvivāka*’ Investigating ‘*Judge*’ is the name given to the officer
appointed by the king to try cases. Though the name, in its literal
significance of ‘questioning and judging’ applies to the king also, yet
we find the two names used separately, in such texts as—‘If the Minister
or the *Judge* (Prāḍvivāka) should pervert the details of a suit, the
*king* himself shall look into it, etc.’ (*Manu*. 9.234.)

In the term ‘*prāḍvivāka*,’ ‘*prāṭ*’ means *one who questions*,
‘*pṛchati*;’ it being derived from the root ‘*prach*’ to ‘question’ with
the nominative affix ‘*kvip*’; the elongation of the vowel and the
change into ‘ṭ’ being analogous to the case of the roots ‘*vaci*,’
‘*śri*,’ ‘*dru*’ ‘*śru*,’ ‘*pru*.’ ‘*Prāṭ*’ is the qualifying epithet to
‘*vivāka*,’ which means ‘one who judges or investigates knotty legal
cases’;—the nominative affix ‘*ghañ*’ being added in accordance with
*Pāṇini* 3. 3. 113, and the change of ‘*ca*’ into ‘*ka*’ being in
accordance with ‘*Pāṇini*’ 7.3.52. the term *prāḍvivāka* thus means the
*questioning or Investigating Judge*.—(79)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted *in Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 75) in
*Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 18);—in

*Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 198);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (33b),
which explains ‘*sabhāntaḥ*’ as ‘in court’, and ‘*anuyuñjīta*’ as
‘should question.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.79-86)  
**

*Śukranīti* (4.5.398-414).—‘The witness should be interrogated, after
being well-governed by oaths, teachings of Purāṇas, narration of great
merits of virtue and the great sins of falsehood:—“Where, when, how,
whence and what have you seen or heard,—whether written by the man
himself or caused to be written by somebody,—speak truly all that you
know.” The witness who gives true evidence attains happy life hereafter
and unrivalled fame in this world—this is the remark of Brahmā, etc.’
(the rest as in Manu 83-85).

*Nārada* (1.198 and 200).—‘After having summoned all the witnesses and
hound them down firmly by an oath, the Judge shall examine them
separately. They should be men of tried integrity and conversant with
the circumstances of the case. By sacred texts extolling the excellence
of truth and denouncing the sinfulness of falsehood, let him inspire
them with deep awe, as follows—(Verses 201 to 228—201, 208, 209 being
the same as Manu 93, 98, 99 respectively)’.—\[All this is to be
addressed to all witnesses; Manu reserves 89 to 101 for *Śūdra*
witnesses only.\]

*Gautama* (13.5).—‘Witnesses shall not speak singly, or without being
asked.’

*Āpastamba* (2.29.7).—‘A person who is possessed of good qualities may
be called as witness and shall answer the questions put to him,
according to the truth...... after having been exhorted to be fair to
both sides.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.24 *et seq*.).—‘Let him exhort the witnesses with the
following speeches—“Whatever places of torture await the killer of a
Brāhmaṇa and other great criminals... those places of abode are ordained
for a witness who gives false evidence; and the fruit of every virtuous
act he has done, from the day of his birth to his dying day, shall he
lost to him. Truth makes the sun spread his rays; Truth makes the moon
shine; Truth makes the wind blow; Truth makes the earth bear all things;
Truth makes waters flow; Truth makes the fire burn. The atmosphere
exists through truth; so do the gods; and so do the offerings. If
veracity and a thousand horse-sacrifices are weighed against each other,
truth ranks even higher than a thousand horse-sacrifices. Those who,
acquainted with the facts, and appointed to give evidence, stand mute,
are equally criminal with, and deserve the same severe punishment as,
false witnesses.” After having addressed him thus, let the King examine
the witnesses in the order of their castes.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.73-75).—‘He shall address the following words to the
witnesses standing near the plaintiff and defendant—“He who hears false
witness goes to those regions which are reserved for people committing
heinous offences, and other crimes, for incendiaries, for murderers of
women and children. Whatever virtuous act you may have done during a
hundred lives, understand that all that will go to the party whom, by
your false evidence, you make lose the suit.”’

*Baudhāyana* (1.19.9 *et seq*.).—‘The wise man should address an
appointed witness in the following manner:—“Whatever merit thou hast
acquired, etc., etc.”’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.32-34).—‘Depose, O witness, according to the truth;
expecting thy answers, thy ancestors hang in suspense, as to whether
they shall rise or fall, etc., etc.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अधुना साक्षिणां सत्यवचनार्थो योगो ऽत ऊर्ध्वं वर्तिष्यते । प्राङ्विवाको ब्राह्मणो राजाधिकृतो विडान् न राजा सामर्थ्यात् । तथा च वक्ष्यति "अमात्यः प्राड्विवाको वा यत् कुर्युः कार्यं अन्यथा" इति । "क्विब्वचिप्रच्छ्यायतस्तुकटप्रुजुश्रीणां दीर्घो ऽप्रसारणं च" इत्य् अनेन । पृच्छतीति प्राट्, पृष्ट्वा विषेषेण धर्मसंकटेषु विशिष्टं वा वक्ष्यति विवाकः, प्राट् चासौ विवाकश् चेति प्राड्विवाकः । पृच्छति चासौ विविनक्ति चेति यावत् एष प्राड्विवाको धर्मज्ञो ब्राह्मणः । साक्षिणो ऽनुयुञ्जीत विधिनानेन वक्ष्यमाणेन संत्वयन्न् अपारुषम् । किं कारणम्, प्रकृतिस्थो यथा सत्यं ब्रूयात् साक्षी ॥ ८.७९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

079	The witnesses being assembled in the court in the presence of the plaintiff and of the defendant, let the judge examine them, kindly exhorting them in the following manner:
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/080_yad_dvayor.md">
<details open><summary><h3>080 यद् द्वयोर् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यद् द्वयोर् अनयोर् वेत्थ  
कार्ये ऽस्मिंश् चेष्टितं मिथः ।  
तद् ब्रूत सर्वं सत्येन  
युष्माकं ह्य् अत्र साक्षिता  ॥ ८.८० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/080_yad_dvayor.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘What you know of the mutual transaction between these two persons regarding this suit,—all that may you declare freely; since you are witnesses in this matter.’—(80)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यज् जानीथ **अस्मिन्** व्यवहारवस्तुनि **अनयोर् मिथः** प्रत्यक्षं[^२९८] रहसि वा **चेष्टितं** वृत्तं **तत् सर्वं सत्येन** तथ्येन **ब्रूत** कथयत । **युष्माकं ह्य् अत्र साक्षिता** भवताम् अत्र प्रामाण्यम् । युष्मद्वचनाधीने सत्यानृते । इत्य् अनेन प्रोत्साह्यन्ते । साक्षिभूता[^२९९] अस्मिन् कार्य इति सामान्यनिर्देशे ऽप्य् अखिलवस्तुश्रावणं सामर्थ्याद् द्रष्टव्यम् । न ह्य् अश्रुतविशेषाः प्रश्नविषयं वेदितुम् अर्हन्तीति ॥ ८.८० ॥


[^२९९]:
     M G: sākṣibhūte


[^२९८]:
     M G DK (1: 260): asmadapratyakṣaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘What you know in regard to the matter of this suit, any transaction,
secret or open, that may have been carried on between these two
persons,—all that declare freely; since you are witnesses in this suit.

‘You are the sole authority in this matter; truth and untruth are in
your hands’—thus addressed the persons cited as witnesses become
encouraged.

‘*In this matter*.’—Though the text mentions this formula in its most
general form, yet, in as much as it is not possible for any person to be
a witness regarding all things, it follows that the subject-matter of
the suit should be stated here. Because until they are informed of the
details they cannot understand the question.—(80)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 75);—in
*Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 18);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (33b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.79-86)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.79].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवं सत्यवचनार्थो ऽयम् अधुनार्थवादः प्रक्रियते ॥ ८.८० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

080	'What ye know to have been mutually transacted in this matter between the two men before us, declare all that in accordance with the truth; for ye are witnesses in this (cause).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/081_satyaM_sAxye.md">
<details open><summary><h3>081 सत्यं साक्ष्ये ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सत्यं साक्ष्ये ब्रुवन् साक्षी  
लोकान् आप्नोति पुष्कलान् [मेधातिथिपाठः - आप्नोत्य् अनिन्दितान्] ।  
इह चाऽनुत्तमां कीर्तिं  
वाग् एषा ब्रह्मपूजिता  ॥ ८.८१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/081_satyaM_sAxye.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘The witness, telling the truth in his evidence, attains irreproachable regions, also unsurpassable fame; such speech is honoured by Brahmā himself.—(81)’
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

इतः प्रभृति सत्यवचनार्थः साक्षिणाम् अनुयोगविधिः । **सत्यं** वदन् **लोकान्** स्वर्गादिलक्षणान् **अनिन्दितान्** अगर्हितान् अभिप्रेतफलभोगहेतून् लभते **साक्षी** । जातिवचनो वा **लोक**शब्दः । शुभे जन्मनि जायत इत्य् अर्थः । अस्मिंश् च जन्मनि **कीर्तिः** ख्यातिर् **अनुत्तमा**[^३००] यस्या अन्यद् उत्तमं प्रकृष्टं नास्ति, तां लभते । साधुवादो जनेनास्मै दीयते । यस्माद् **एषा** च **वाक्** सत्या सरस्वती **ब्रह्मणा** प्रजापतिना **पूजिता** ॥ ८.८१ ॥


[^३००]:
     J: kīrtiṃ khyātim anuttamām
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

From this verse onward the text lays down the manner in which the
witnesses are to be exhorted.

By telling the truth, the witness attains ‘irreproachable regions,’ in
the shape of Heaven and the rest, which are the source of desirable
results.

Or, the term ‘*l oka*’ may be taken in the sense of ‘caste’; the sense
in that case would he that ‘he is born in a happy future life.’

In the present life also, he obtains ‘*unsurpassable fame*’—renown,
superior to which there is none; *i.e*., people bestow praise upon him.

Such—truthful—speech is honoured by Brahmā, Prajāpati, himself.—(81)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Hopkins is again wrong in saying that “this verse is omitted by
Nandana.”

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 75);—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (33b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 53b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.79-86)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.79].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

दृष्टादृष्टफलसंबन्धेनेयं स्तुतिः सत्यवचनार्था । न च केवलं सत्यस्यावचनाद् एतद् यथोक्तं न भवति, किं तर्हि प्रत्यवायश् चापरः । तथा प्रदर्शयति ॥ ८.८१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

081	'A witness who speaks the truth in his evidence, gains (after death) the most excellent regions (of bliss) and here (below) unsurpassable fame; such testimony is revered by Brahman (himself).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/082_sAxye.anRtam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>082 साक्ष्ये ऽनृतम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

साक्ष्ये ऽनृतं वदन् पाशैर्  
बध्यते वारुणैर् भृशम् ।  
विवशः शतम् आजातीस्  
तस्मात् साक्ष्यं वदेद् ऋतम्  ॥ ८.८२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/082_sAxye.anRtam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘Stating the untruth in his evidence, he becomes firmly bound in Varuṇa’s fetters, helpless during a hundred births. One should, therefore, give true evidence.’—(82)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वेण दृष्टादृष्टशुभाशुभप्रदर्शनेन सत्यवचने साक्षिणः प्रोत्साहिताः । अनेन विपरीताभिधाने दुःखोत्पत्तिदर्शनम् । सत्यवचनार्थम् एवैतत् । साक्षिणः कर्म **साक्ष्यम्** । तत्रासत्यं ब्रुवाणो **वारुणैः पाशैर्** **बध्यते** पीड्यते । **भृशम्** अत्यर्थम् । **विवशः** परतन्त्रीकृतः सर्वचेष्टासु वाक्चक्षुर्गतास्व् अपि । **शतं** यावज् जन्मनि वारुणाः पाशा घोराः सर्परज्जवो जलोदराणि वा । एतद्दोषपरिहारार्थं सत्यं वदेद् इति विधिः । **आजातीर्** इति नायं मर्यादाभिविध्योर् आङ् । तथा सति पञ्चमी स्यात् । तस्माद् उपसर्गो ऽयम् अनर्थकः, प्रलम्बत[^३०१] इतिवत्[^३०२] । द्वितीया चेयं आवृत्तिश् चात्र गम्यते । शतं जन्मान्य् आवर्तते उदरगृहीतः ॥ ८.८२ ॥


[^३०२]:
     M G DK (1: 261): iti yāvat


[^३०१]:
     J: pralamba
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The preceding verse encourages the witnesses by putting before them the
spiritual and temporal results following from the telling of truth; the
present verso describes how results accrue from saying what is contrary
to truth; and the purpose of this also is to induce the witness to tell
the truth.

‘*Sākṣya*,’ ‘*evidence*,’ is the work of the witness; in that work,
stating what is not true, the man becomes ‘*bound*’—tormented—‘*in
Varuṇa’s fetters*,’—‘*firmly*’—to a very great extent;—‘*helpless*’—
rendered totally dependent on others, even in regard to the operations
of speech and the eyes,—‘*during a hundred births*.’

‘*Varuṇa’s fetters*’ are in the shape of terrible snakes or in the form
of the disease of *dropsy*.

In order to guard against such calamities, the witness should state the
truth;—such is the sense of the injunction implied by the text.

In the term ‘*ājātīḥ*,’ the initial *ā* is not the indeclinable ‘*āṅ*’
which denotes *limit*; for, if it were that or we would have the
Ablative ending. Hence it is to be taken as a preposition meaning
nothing; just like the preposition ‘*pra*’ in such words as
‘*pralambate*’ and the like. The case-ending also is the Accusative.
What the term signifies is *repetition*; the meaning being that the man
sutlers from dropsy repeatedly during one hundred births.—(82)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“Dropsy is a disease specially attributed to Varuṇa (see Ṛgveda 7.89.1,
and the story of Śunaḥśepha, Aitareya Brāhmaṇa 7.15). The fetters of
Varuṇa are mentioned as the punishment of liars in the Atharva Veda,
4.16.6.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 199);—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (33b), which explains ‘*śatam-ājātīḥ*’ as ‘during a
hundred lives’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 53b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.79-86)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.79](http://www.wisdomlib.org/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc200984.html#comparative-notes "English translation of verse").
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यस्मात् —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

082	'He who gives false evidence is firmly bound by Varuna's fetters, helpless during one hundred existences; let (men therefore) give true evidence.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/083_satyena_pUyate.md">
<details open><summary><h3>083 सत्येन पूयते ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सत्येन पूयते साक्षी  
धर्मः सत्येन वर्धते ।  
तस्मात् सत्यं हि वक्तव्यं  
सर्ववर्णेषु साक्षिभिः  ॥ ८.८३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/083_satyena_pUyate.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘By truth is the witness purified, by truth does merit grow: hence the truth should be spoken by witnesses of all castes.’—(83)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**पूयते** शुद्ध्यत्य् अन्यस्माद् अपि पापान् मुच्यत इति यावत् । शेषं गतार्थम् ॥ ८.८३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Purified*’—becomes pure; *i.e*., purged of other sins also. The rest
is clear.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.79-86)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.79](http://www.wisdomlib.org/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc200984.html#comparative-notes "English translation of verse").
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

येन —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

083	'By truthfulness a witness is purified, through truthfulness his merit grows, truth must, therefore, be spoken by witnesses of all castes (varna).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/084_Atmaiva_hy.md">
<details open><summary><h3>084 आत्मैव ह्य् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

आत्मैव ह्य् आत्मनः साक्षी  
गतिर् आत्मा तथात्मनः ।  
मावमंस्थाः स्वम् आत्मानं  
नृणां साक्षिणम् उत्तमम्  ॥ ८.८४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/084_Atmaiva_hy.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘The soul itself is the soul’s witness, and the soul itself is the soul’s refuge; disregard not your soul, the best witness of man.’—(84)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

एष एवार्थो विस्पष्टीक्रियते उत्तरेण श्लोकेन ॥ ८.८४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This same idea is made clear in the next verse.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 199);—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (33b),—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 53b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.79-86)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.79](http://www.wisdomlib.org/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc200984.html#comparative-notes "English translation of verse").
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

084	'The Soul itself is the witness of the Soul, and the Soul is the refuge of the Soul; despise not thy own Soul, the supreme witness of men.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/085_manyante_vai.md">
<details open><summary><h3>085 मन्यन्ते वै ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

मन्यन्ते वै पापकृतो  
न कश् चित् पश्यतीति नः ।  
तांस् तु देवाः प्रपश्यन्ति  
स्वस्यैवाऽन्तरपूरुषः  ॥ ८.८५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/085_manyante_vai.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘The sinners indeed think that “no one sees us”; but the gods see them, as also their own inner personality.’—(85)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**न**शब्दो व्यवहितः । **पापकृतः** कूटादिकारिण एवं जानते । **न कश्चिद्** अस्मान् **पश्यतीति** । **इति**कारेण मन्यतेर् वाक्यार्थः कर्मेति प्रतिपाद्यते । **न** **नः** **कश्चित् पश्यतीत्य्** एष वाक्यार्थः । **तांस् तु देवा** वक्ष्यमाणाः **पश्यन्ति** । स्वस्यान्तरात्मा । तद् उक्तम् "आत्माइव ह्य् आत्मनः साक्षी" (म्ध् ८.८४) इति । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु कः पुनर् अयं पापचारी, तस्य च को ऽन्यो द्रष्टा । यावतात्मैव कर्ता शुभाशुभानां चान्तरपुरुषो द्रष्टेति । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;सत्यम् । तस्यैव देवतात्वम् अध्यारोप्य भेदेन कर्मकर्तृव्यपदेशो ऽनृतनिवृत्त्यर्थः । देवतारूपं त्वं जानीषे[^३०३] । तात्त्विकम् आत्मीयम् आन्तरं रूपं शारीरम्, तथा बाह्यम् अनात्मीयम् असारम्, एतदुपभोगार्थं मा दुष्कृतं कार्षीर् इति प्रोत्साह्यते । अतो "मावमंस्थाः स्वम् आत्मानम्" मावज्ञासीर् "नृणां साक्षिणम् अनुत्तमम्" (म्ध् ८.८४) । अन्यो हि साक्षी अस्मिन्न् एव लोके, अयं तु मृतस्यापि साक्ष्यं ददाति । तस्माद् एतस्माद् भेतव्यम् । असत्यवादी[^३०४] कदाचिन् मन्यते- "आत्मान्तरं प्रतिपन्नस्य किम् एष मे द्रष्टापि करिष्यति" इति । तन् न । "गतिर् आत्मा तथात्मनः"[^३०५] (म्ध् ८.८४) । आत्मानम् अन्तरेणान्या गतिर् नास्ति । न हि द्वाव् आत्मानाव् एकस्य भवतः । 


[^३०५]:
     M G omit: ātmāntaraṃ pratipannasya kim eṣa me draṣṭāpi kariṣyatīti | tan na | gatir ātmā tathātmanaḥ


[^३०४]:
     M G: nāsatyavādinā


[^३०३]:
     M G DK (1: 262): jānīṣva

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु मन्यन्ते परमात्मा साक्षी संसार्यात्मानो नियोज्या इति भेदः ॥ ८.८५ ॥

_के पुनस् ते देवा रहस्य् अपि प्रच्छन्नं पापम् आचरन्तं ये पश्यन्ति, अत आह ।_
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The particle ‘*na*’ is misplaced.

‘*Sinners*’—perjurors and others—‘*think*’—feel—that ‘*no one sees
us*’;—the particle ‘*iti*’ shows that the whole clause is the object (of
the verb ‘think’);—the construction of the clause being ‘*na naḥ kaścit
paśyati*.’

‘*The gods*’—named in the next verse—‘*see them*’; as also their own
sinner soul. This is what is meant by the assertion that ‘the soul is
the soul’s witness.’

“But who is it that commits the sin? And who apart from him is the one
that *sees*? In fact it is the soul itself that does all that is good or
evil, and certainly there is no other ‘inner personality’ that sees it.”

True; but the same soul has been represented as a ‘god,’ and as such
spoken of as the doer of the act (of *seeing*); and this has been done
for the purpose of preventing the man from telling a lie, the sense of
the exhortation thus is—

‘You know that the real nature of your true personality is *divine*,
which is within the body, while your exterior body is not your
soul;—hence, for the nourishing of this latter, do not commit a single
act;—hence too *do not disregard or despise your soul, the best witness
of man*. Other witnesses give evidence only in this world, while the
soul hears evidence even after death; hence one should be afraid of such
a witness.’

The liar may be led to think—‘when I am born again with another soul,
what will my present soul, which is the seer, be able to do to me?’ But
this is not so; since ‘*the soul is the soul’s refuge*’ (verse 84).
Apart from his soul, there is no refuge for man; and there are not two
souls for a single man.

Others hold that the difference is that the soul spoken of as the
‘*witness*’ is the supreme one, while the souls born in the persons of
the world are those that are under his sway.—(85)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 199);—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (33b),—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 53b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.79-86)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.79](http://www.wisdomlib.org/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc200984.html#comparative-notes "English translation of verse").
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **आत्माइव ह्य् आत्मनः साक्षी गतिर् आत्मा तथात्मनः ।**

एतस्मात् कारणात् —

> **मावमंस्थाः स्वम् आत्मानं नृणां साक्षिणम् उत्तमम् ॥ ८.८४ ॥**  
> **मन्यते वै पापकृतो न कश्चित् पश्यतीति नः ।**

इह प्रकरणाद् अनृताभिधायिनः पापकृत इत्य् उच्यन्ते । सामर्थ्यात् तु सर्वस्य व्यतिक्रमकारिण इदं ग्रहणम् —

> **तांश् च देवाः प्रपश्यन्ति स्वश् चैवान्तरपूरुषः  ॥ ८.८५ ॥**
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

085	'The wicked, indeed, say in their hearts, "Nobody sees us;" but the gods distinctly see them and the male within their own breasts.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/086_dyaur_bhUmir.md">
<details open><summary><h3>086 द्यौर् भूमिर् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

द्यौर् भूमिर् आपो हृदयं  
चन्द्रार्काग्नि-यमानिलाः ।  
रात्रिः संध्ये च धर्मश् च  
वृत्तज्ञाः सर्वदेहिनाम्  ॥ ८.८६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/086_dyaur_bhUmir.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘Heaven, earth, water, heart, moon, sun, fire, death-god, wind, night, the two twilights, and morality know the conduct of all corporeal beings.’—(86)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**हृदय**शब्देन हृदयायतनो लिङ्गपुरुष उच्यते । दिवादीनां[^३०६] द्रष्टृत्वम् अचेतनेषु चैतन्यम् आरोप्यते[^३०७] । दर्शनान्तरे तु महाभूतानि देवतात्मतया चेतनान्य् एव । तथा च[^३०८] पृथिवी भारावतरणाय ब्रह्माणम् उपागमद् इति वर्ण्यते । सर्वगतत्वात् तेषां न किंचिद् अप्रत्ययम् अस्तीति सर्वशरीरिणां वृत्तं शीलं चात्मनः कायगतं शुभम् अशुभं च जानते ॥ ८.८६ ॥


[^३०८]:
     DK omit: darśanāntare tu mahābhūtāni devatātmatayā cetanāny eva | tathā ca


[^३०७]:
     M G: draṣṭṛtvam acaitanyā śrutyāropyate


[^३०६]:
     M G DK: devādīnāṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The question ending as to who are the gods that see the sin committed
secretly and in private, the text puts forward present verse.

The term ‘*heart*’ stands for the subtle spirit located in the heart.
The Heaven and the rest are spoken of as ‘seers’ figuratively;—though
they are insentient, they are represented as sentient. According to
other philosophical systems, all the great elemental substances are
portions of gods, and as such actually sentient; *e.g*., it is described
that the earth went to Brahmā, in order to seek for help in relieving
her of the burden of sinners.

The gods being all-pervading, there is nothing unknown to them; hence
they know the conduct and character, as also the good and bad points in
the body of the soul.—(86)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 200);—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (33b),—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 53b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.79-86)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.79](http://www.wisdomlib.org/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc200984.html#comparative-notes "English translation of verse").
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

देवास् ते इत्य् उच्यन्ते —
अन्तरपूरुषः स्वक्षेत्रज्ञो ऽन्तर्यामी परमात्मा । एवं च न रहस्य् अपि पापं वर्तयेद् न को ऽपि । यतश् चैतद् एवम् । अतस् तेषां नियम उच्यते
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

086	'The sky, the earth, the waters, (the male in) the heart, the moon, the sun, the fire, Yama and the wind, the night, the two twilights, and justice know the conduct of all corporeal beings.'
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/087_deva-brAhmaNasAnnidhye_sAxyam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>087 देव-ब्राह्मणसान्निध्ये साक्ष्यम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

देव-ब्राह्मणसांनिध्ये  
साक्ष्यं पृच्छेद् ऋतं द्विजान् ।  
उदङ्-मुखान् प्राङ्-मुखान् वा  
पूर्वाह्णे वै शुचिः शुचीन्  ॥ ८.८७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/087_deva-brAhmaNasAnnidhye_sAxyam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the presence of gods and Brāhmaṇas, during forenoon, the judge, pure himself, shall ask the twice-born persons, who have been purified and are facing either the north or the east, to give evidence.—(87)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**देवा** दुर्गामार्तण्डादयः प्रतिमाकल्पिताः । **शुचीन्** कृतस्नानाचमनादिविधीन् । **शुचिः** प्रष्टा स्वयम् अपि तथाविध एव स्यात् । **ऋतम्** इति श्लोकपूरणार्थम् एव । प्रसिद्धम् अन्यत् ॥ ८.८७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Gods*’—Durgā, Sūrya and the rest, set up in the form of images.

‘*Purified*,’—*i.e*., who have performed the rites of bathing,
mouth-rinsing and so forth.

‘*Pure*,’—the judge himself should have purified himself in the same
way.

‘*Truth*,’—this is a mere re-iteration of what is already implied; and
it servos the purpose of filling up the metre.—(87)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 673);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 78);—in *Vyvahāramayūkha* (p. 18);—in *Vyavahāratattva*
(p. 32);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 203);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(33b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba* (2.29.7).—(See under 79.)

*Viṣṇu* (8.19).—‘Let the Judge summon the witnesses at the time of
sunrise, and examine them after having bound them by an oath.’

*Nārada* (1.198).—‘After having summoned all the witnesses, and bound
them down firmly by oath, the Judge shall examine them separately; they
should be men of proved integrity and conversant with the circumstances
of the case.’

*Bṛhaspati* (7.22, 23).—‘Knowing all this, the witness should give
evidence according to truth. After putting off his shoes and his turban,
he should stretch out his right hand, and declare the truth, taking in
his hands, gold, cowdung or blades of *kuśa* grass.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यथा च ते प्रष्टव्यास् तथेदं ब्राहणादि(?)जात्याश्रयनियमकारि शास्त्रम् उच्यते ॥ ८.८७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

087	The (judge), being purified, shall ask in the forenoon the twice-born (witnesses) who (also have been) purified, (and stand) facing the north or the east, to give true evidence in the presence of (images of) the gods and of Brahmanas.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/088_brUhIti_brAhmaNam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>088 ब्रूहीति ब्राह्मणम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ब्रूहीति ब्राह्मणं पृच्छेत्  
सत्यं ब्रूहीति पार्थिवम् ।  
गो-बीज-काञ्चनैर् वैश्यं  
शूद्रं सर्वैस् तु पातकैः  ॥ ८.८८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/088_brUhIti_brAhmaNam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall question the Brāhmaṇa with the word ‘speak,’ the Kṣatriya with ‘speak out the truth,’ the Vaiśya by sins pertaining to kine, grain and food, and the Śūdra by all the sins.—(88)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^३०९]:
     All editions read "sarvais," but it is clear that Medhātithi's reading was "ebhis", as is evident from his commentary: "vakṣyamāṇaiḥ pātakaiḥ", and the reading "śūdram ebhis tu pātakaiḥ" given at 8.99.

<u>क्व पुनर्</u> इयं तृतीया **गोबीजकाञ्चनैर्** इति । यदि तावत् **पृच्छेद्** इति क्रियासंबन्धात् करणम् उच्यते, तद् अनुपपन्नम् । शब्दो हि तत्र करणम्, नार्थः । 

<u>नैष दोषः</u> । यथा गवादीनि प्रश्नकरणत्वं प्रतिपद्यन्ते तथा व्याख्येयम् । **पातकैर्** इत्य् उभयशेषो विज्ञेयः- **गोबीजकाञ्चनैः** **पातकैर्** इति । तेनायम् अर्थो भवति । गोबीजकाञ्चनविषयैः पातकप्रदर्शनैः पृच्छेद् इति । "गां हृत्वा हत्वा वा यत् पातकं तद् भवति तव मिथ्या वदतः" इति प्रश्नवाक्यं पठितव्यम् । एवं वक्ष्यमाणैः पातकैः शूद्रं पृच्छेत् । पातकशब्दस् तु पातकप्रदर्शनार्थेष्व्[^३१०] अभिधानेषु द्रष्टव्यो मुख्यानां प्रश्नकरणत्वाभावाद् इत्य् उक्तम् ॥ ८.८८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

“On what basis do we have the instrumental ending in *gobījakāñcanaiḥ*?
If it be said to be due to these being *instruments* in the act of
*questioning*, that cannot be; as it is the word (and not the kine,
etc.) that are the *instruments*, a means of questioning.”

There is no force in this objection. We have to construe the words in
such a manner as to make the ‘kine,’ etc., instruments of the
questioning. The word ‘*pātakaiḥ*,’ ‘*sins*’ has got to be construed
both ways, so that we have the phrase ‘*gobījakāñcunaiḥ pātakaiḥ*,’
which gives the meaning that ‘he should ask them by mentioning sins
pertaining to the kine, grains and gold,’ *i.e*., the form of the
question to be employed should he—‘if you tell a lie, you would he
incurring the same sin that follows from stealing or killing the cow.’

Similarly, by mentioning the sins going to be enumerated (in the next
verse), he should question the *Śūdra*. The term ‘*sin*’ here should he
taken as standing for *words expressing sins*; because the sins
themselves could not be the *means or instrument* of the *questioning*,
as pointed out above.—(88)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Gobījakañcanaiḥ*’—‘Threatening him with the guilt of all offences
committed against kine and the rest’ (Medhātithi) ‘with the guilt of the
theft of kine etc.’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘with the
loss of his kine etc.’ (Nārāyaṇa);—‘by making him touch the cow and
other things’ (Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 674);—and in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 78), where however the first half is read as “sasyena
śāpayedvi??aṃ kṣanniyaṃ vāhanāyudhaiḥ”;—in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 215),
which adds:—The Vaiśya is to be admonished with the words:—‘those sins
would accrue to you which are involved in stealing the cow etc. if you
tell a lie and the Śūdra with the words—‘all kinds of sins would fall on
you etc. etc.’;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 204);—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (33b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (8.20-23).—‘The Brāhmaṇa witness, the Judge shall exhort to
*declare*,—the Kṣatriya, to *declare the truth*:—the Vaiśya he shall
address thus:—‘*Thy kine and gold shall yield thee no fruit*”;—the Śūdra
he should address thus:—“*Thou shalt have to atone for all heavy
crimes*.”’

*Nārada* (1.198).—‘He shall cause the Brāhmaṇa to swear by truth, the
Kṣatriya by his conveyances and weapons, the Vaiśya by his cows, grain
or gold; and the Śūdra by all sorts of crimes.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पातकार्था अनुयोगाः पातकशब्देनोच्यन्ते, मिथ्यावचनप्रतिषेधार्थाः । इदं चापरं ब्राह्मणस्य साक्षित्वेन निदर्शनम् ॥ ८.८८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

088	Let him examine a Brahmana (beginning with) 'Speak,' a Kshatriya (beginning with) 'Speak the truth,' a Vaisya (admonishing him) by (mentioning) his kine, grain, and gold, a Sudra (threatening him) with (the guilt of) every crime that causes loss of caste;
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/089_brahmaghno_ye.md">
<details open><summary><h3>089 ब्रह्मघ्नो ये ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ब्रह्मघ्नो ये स्मृता लोका  
ये च स्त्री-बाल-घातिनः ।  
मित्रद्रुहः कृत-घ्नस्य  
ते ते स्युर् ब्रुवतो मृषा  ॥ ८.८९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/089_brahmaghno_ye.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘Whatever regions have been assigned to the slayer of the Brāhmaṇa, to the murderer of women and children, to the betrayer of friends and to the ingrate,—those same shall be thine if thou speakest falsely.’—(89)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

ब्राह्मणं हत्वा ये लोका नरकादिलक्षणाः प्राप्यन्ते तत्कारिभिस् **ते** तव भवन्ति मिथ्यावदतस् तस्मात् सत्यं ब्रूहीत्य् अनुयोगः । यश् च मित्रं द्रुह्यति ब्राह्मणादीन् दारसर्वस्वापहरणादिना[^३११] नाशयति — यश् च कृतम् उपकारं विस्मृत्य तम् एवोपकर्तारम् अपकरोति — यत् तस्य **कृतघ्नस्य**[^३१२] परत्र दुःखं तद् अवाप्नोति ॥ ८.८९ ॥


[^३१२]:
     M G DK omit: kṛtaghnasya


[^३११]:
     M G DK (1: 264): brāhmaṇadāra-
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘Those regions, in the shape of hell and the rest, which are reached by
those persons who have killed a Brāhmaṇa, shall he yours, if you tell
the untruth; therefore you should tell the truth,’—such is the
exhortation.

‘*The betrayer of friends*’—he who ruins the Brāhamaṇa and others by
depriving them of their wife and property.

‘*The ingrate*’: ho who forgets the benefits conferred upon him, and
causes injury to that same person who had conferred those on him; and
the *perjuror* suffers the same pains that befall such a person.—(89)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 78);—in
*Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 215);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 204);—and
in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (35a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.89-97)**

\[See the texts under [79 *et
seq*.]\]
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

089	(Saying), 'Whatever places (of torment) are assigned (by the sages) to the slayer of a Brahmana, to the murderer of women and children, to him who betrays a friend, and to an ungrateful man, those shall be thy (portion), if thou speakest falsely.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/090_janmaprabhRti_yat.md">
<details open><summary><h3>090 जन्मप्रभृति यत् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

जन्मप्रभृति यत् किं चित्  
पुण्यं भद्र त्वया कृतम् ।  
तत् ते सर्वं शुनो गच्छेद्  
यदि ब्रूयास् त्वम् अन्यथा  ॥ ८.९० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/090_janmaprabhRti_yat.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘Whatever merit, good man, you may have acquired since your birth, would go to the dogs, if you speak falsely.’—(90)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**शुनो गच्छेन्** निष्फलं स्याद् भवत इत्य्[^३१३] अर्थः । <u>अन्ये</u> तु[^३१४] दोषप्रदर्शनार्थं श्वगमनवचनम् । यथा कृच्छ्रेण महता सुवर्णाद्युत्तमद्रव्यम् अर्जयित्वाशुचिप्रवाहे त्यजेत् तादृक् सुकृतं भवति । न पुनर् अन्यकृतस्य सुकृतस्यान्यत्र गमनम् अस्तीत्य् असकृद् उक्तम् एतत् ॥ ८.९० ॥


[^३१४]:
     M G DK: atyalpa-


[^३१३]:
     M G: bhavaty evety
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Would go to the dogs*’—would be futile, so far as you are concerned.
Others however explain that ‘going to the dogs’ is indicative of
positive harm; the sense being—‘the merit of the man becomes thrown
away, in the same manner in which a man, having earned, with great
difficulty, gold and other excellent treasures, were to throw it all
into an unclean stream’: it has been pointed out more than once that the
merit acquired by one person cannot go over to another.—(90)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Cf*. 3.230 and 11.122.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 674);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 78);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 204);—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (35a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.89-97)**

\[See the texts under [79 *et
seq*.]\]
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

090	'(The reward) of all meritorious deeds which thou, good man, hast done since thy birth, shall become the share of the dogs, if in thy speech thou departest from the truth.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/091_eko.aham.md">
<details open><summary><h3>091 एको ऽहम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एको ऽहम् अस्मीत्य् आत्मानं  
यस् त्वं कल्याण मन्यसे ।  
नित्यं स्थितस् ते हृद्य् एष  
पुण्य-पापेक्षिता मुनिः  ॥ ८.९१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/091_eko.aham.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘You think yourself, blessed man, that “I am alone”; but there ever sits in your heart the silent watcher of virtue and vice.’—(91)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**पुण्यपापयोर् ईक्षिता** द्रष्टा मुनिस् तूष्णींभूतः ॥ ९.९१ ॥

_कः पुनर् असौ मुनिः । भयातिशयप्रदर्शनार्थम् आह ।_
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Watcher*’—seer—‘of virtue and vice—‘*mauni*’—silent.—(91)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Cf*. The Mahābhārata 1.74.28.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 674);—and in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Vyavahāra, p. 204).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.89-97)**

\[See the texts under [79 *et
seq*.]\]
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

091	'If thou thinkest, O friend of virtue, with respect to thyself, "I am alone," (know that) that sage who witnesses all virtuous acts and all crimes, ever resides in thy heart.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/092_yamo_vaivasvato.md">
<details open><summary><h3>092 यमो वैवस्वतो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यमो वैवस्वतो देवो यस्  
तवैष हृदि स्थितः ।  
तेन चेद् अविवादस् ते  
मा गङ्गां मा कुरून् गमः  ॥ ८.९२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/092_yamo_vaivasvato.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘The, god Yama, the son of Vivasvat, who sits in your heart,—if you have no quarrel with him, you need not visit the Gaṅgā, nor the Kurus.—(92)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

य एष[^३१५] **यमः** सर्वप्राणिनां देहधनाद्युच्छेदकारी[^३१६] यातनाभिश् च निगृह्णीतेति श्रुतिपथम् आगतो भवतः, सो ऽयं तव हृदये वर्तते, न विप्रकृष्टः । स च[^३१७] कृतापराधम् अधुनैव यमयति[^३१८] । मा चैवं मनसि कृथाः- एष आत्मा मदीयो माम् उपेक्षिष्यत इति । न ह्य् एतस्य कश्चिद् आत्मीयः । **तेन चेद् अविवादः** स चेत् प्रसन्नः प्रत्ययितः[^३१९] किं **गङ्गा**गमनेन स्नानार्थिनः पापशुद्धये, किं वा **कुरु**क्षेत्रगमने ऽस्ति प्रयोजनम् । यत्फलं पापप्रमोचनलक्षणं ततः प्राप्यते तद् इहैवाविसंवादिनि परमात्मनि । न हि पापकारिण आत्मा निर्विशङ्को भवति । किं मे ऽन्तः[^३२०] स्याद् एतेनेति । नास्तिकस्यापि किंकथिका कदाचित् भवत्य् एव । **गङ्गा**नदी पावयन्ती । **कुरु**क्षेत्रं तु देश एव पावनः ॥ ८.९२ ॥


[^३२०]:
     M G DK: me 'taḥ


[^३१९]:
     M G DK: pratyayinaḥ


[^३१८]:
     M G DK: nayati


[^३१७]:
     M G DK: satrā


[^३१६]:
     M G DK: dehavanādy-


[^३१५]:
     M G DK: yathā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

With a view to strike terror in the heart of the man, it is next
described who is the ‘*silent watcher*’ (mentioned in the preceding
verse).

You have heard of the God, who is the destroyer of the body and property
and other things belonging to all living beings, and who punishes them
with torments; that God resides in your heart, and not away from you; in
the event of committing a wrong, he will punish you immediately;—and do
not think that being your own sold, ho will ignore your fault; because
no one is his ‘own.’

‘*If you have no quarrel with him*’—if he is satisfied with you and
trusts you, then what would be the need for your going to bathe in the
Gaṅgā for the cleansing of your sins? What too would be the need for
going to *Kurukṣetra*? For the reward of going to these places consists
in the destruction of sins and acquiring of merit; and all this is
obtained by the man here and now, if he is at pence with the Supreme
Self (within him). As a matter of fact, the soul of a sinner is never
free from fear; the unbeliever also has doubts regarding what is going
to happen to him at death.

The *Gaṅgā* is a river that purifies: and in ‘*Kurukṣetra*’ it is the
land itself that purities.—(92)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 674);—and in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Vyavahāra, p. 204), which explains ‘*Kūrun*’ as ‘Kurukṣetra.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.89-97)**

\[See the texts under [79 *et
seq*.]\]
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

092	'If thou art not at variance with that divine Yama, the son of Vivasvat, who dwells in thy heart, thou needest neither visit the Ganges nor the (land of the) Kurus.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/093_nagno_muNDaH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>093 नग्नो मुण्डः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

नग्नो मुण्डः कपालेन च  
भिक्षार्थी क्षुत्-पिपासितः [मेधातिथिपाठः - कपाली] ।  
अन्धः शत्रुकुलं गच्छेद्  
यः साक्ष्यम् अनृतं वदेत्  ॥ ८.९३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/093_nagno_muNDaH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘He who gives false evidence shall go for alms, with a potsherd, to the house of his enemy,—naked and shorn, tormented with hunger and thirst, and blind.’—(93)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कपालं शरावादिपात्रैकदेशः सुबोधम् ॥ ८.९३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Potsherd*’—a piece of the cup or some other earthenware pot. The rest
is easily intelligible.—(93)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Hopkins remarks that ‘*gṛham*’ is the reading of Medhātithi (for
‘*Kulam*’). But there is nothing in the *Bhāṣya* to show this.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 674);—in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Vyavahāra, p. 204);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (35a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.89-97)**

\[See the texts under [79 *et
seq*.]\]
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

093	'Naked and shorn, tormented with hunger and thirst, and deprived of sight, shall the man who gives false evidence, go with a potsherd to beg food at the door of his enemy.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/094_avAk-shirAs_tamasy.md">
<details open><summary><h3>094 अवाक्-शिरास् तमस्य् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अवाक्-शिरास् तमस्य् अन्धे  
किल्बिषी नरकं व्रजेत् ।  
यः प्रश्नं वितथं ब्रूयात्  
पृष्टः सन् धर्मनिश्चये  ॥ ८.९४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/094_avAk-shirAs_tamasy.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘Headlong, in blind darkness shall the sinner fall into hell, who, on being interrogated in the course of a judicial investigation, answers the question falsely.—(94)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

निमित्तं पृष्टो यो **वितथम्** असत्यं वक्ति स तेन **किल्बिषेन** पापेन गृहीत ऊर्ध्वपादो ऽधोमुखो महति गाढे **तमसि नरकं** यातनास्थानं तत्प्राप्नोतीत्य् अर्थः । अन्यस्मिंस् **तमसि** किंचिद् दृश्यते तत्र तु न किंचिद् एवेत्य् **अन्ध्**अग्रहणम् ॥ ८.९४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

On being questioned regarding the subject-matter of the investigation,
if one should state what is not true,—by that sin he falls into
‘*hell*’—the place of punishment—with his feet held upwards and the head
hanging below—into intense darkness. In ordinary darkness, people can
see something, but in the darkness referred to, nothing can be seen;
hence the epithet ‘*blind*.’—(94)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (35a);—in *Aparārka* (p.
674);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 204).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.89-97)**

\[See the texts under [79 *et
seq*.]\]
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

094	'Headlong, in utter darkness shall the sinful man tumble into hell, who being interrogated in a judicial inquiry answers one question falsely.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/095_andho_matsyAn.md">
<details open><summary><h3>095 अन्धो मत्स्यान् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अन्धो मत्स्यान् इवाऽश्नाति  
स नरः कण्टकैः सह ।  
यो भाषते ऽर्थवैकल्यम्  
अप्रत्यक्षं सभां गतः  ॥ ८.९५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/095_andho_matsyAn.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘He who, having entered the court, bears testimony to what is contrary to facts and what he has not seen, swallows fish along with the bones,—just like a blind man.’—(95)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अर्थवैकल्यं** सत्याद् अपेतं **भाषते** । यथा कण्टका अशिता[^३२१] भक्षिता जनयन्ति न तादृशीं मत्स्याः प्रीतिं जनयन्ति । यदा धनलोभेन काचित् प्रीतिमात्रा भवति तथापि महादुःखं[^३२२] भवतीति सकण्टकमत्याशनोपमा ॥ ८.९५ ॥


[^३२२]:
     M G: mohaduḥkhaṃ


[^३२१]:
     M G: asitā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The pleasure produced by the eating of the fish is not equal to the pain
caused by the swallowing of the bones; similarly, there is a slight
pleasure produced by the little money that is received (as bribe), but
the subsequent suffering is very great; it is on this basis that the
analogy of fish-eating has been cited.—(95)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 205), whiqḥ says
that according to some

people, this and the preceding two verses are to be addressed to
witnesses of the lower order only; hence in ordinary cases, after
‘*kurūn gamaḥ*’, the exhortation should begin with ‘*yāvato bāndhavān*
&c.’ (verse 97);—these exhortations are to be addressed to Śūdras and to
poverty-stricken twice-born persons also;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (35b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.89-97)**

\[See the texts under [79 *et
seq*.]\]
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

095	'That man who in a court (of justice) gives an untrue account of a transaction (or asserts a fact) of which he was not an eye-witness, resembles a blind man who swallows fish with the bones.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/096_yasya_vidvAn.md">
<details open><summary><h3>096 यस्य विद्वान् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यस्य विद्वान् हि वदतः  
क्षेत्रज्ञो नाऽभिशङ्कते [मेधातिथिपाठः - नाऽतिशङ्कते ।  
तस्मान् न देवाः श्रेयांसं  
लोके ऽन्यं पुरुषं विदुः  ॥ ८.९६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/096_yasya_vidvAn.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘The gods do not regard any person in this world as superior to him, whom his knowing soul does not distrust, while he is speaking.’—(96)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**यस्य वदतः** साक्षिणो **विद्वान्** सत्यानृते जानानः **क्षेत्रज्ञो** ऽन्तर्यामी पुरुषो **नातिशङ्कते** किम् अयं सत्यं वक्ष्यत्य् अनृतं वेत्य् एवं नाशङ्कते, निश्चितम् एवैष सत्यं वक्तीति यस्यात्मा निर्विशङ्कः तस्मात् पुरुषान् **नान्यं** **श्रेयांसं** श्रेष्ठं प्रशस्ततमं **पुरुषं देवा** जानते । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कः पुनर् अयं वेदिता । कश् च ततो ऽन्य आशङ्किता । एक एव ह्य् आत्मा स्वप्रयत्नद्वारेण वाचम् ईरयन् वेदिता संपद्यते । स एव तद्धर्मेण किं कथं स्याद् इत्य् एवंरूपेणाशङ्काख्यानेन युज्यते । तत्र भेदानुपपत्तिः । 

<u>सत्यम्</u> एतत् । काल्पनिकेन भेदेनैवम् उक्तम् । यथा हन्त्य् आत्मानम् आत्मनेति ॥ ८.९६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*While he is speaking*’—while the witness is giving evidence.

‘*Knowing*,’—cognisant of what is true and what is not true.

‘*Soul*’—the Inner Guide.

‘*Does not distrust*,’—has no doubt as to whether the man will tell the
truth or not; is sure that ho will tell the truth.

He whose innermost soul is so confident,—to such a person the gods
regard no one *as ‘superior*’—more praiseworthy.

“Who is the *speaker*, and who, apart from him, is the *distruster*? In
fact, the soul is one only; when he, through his effort, utters speech,
he becomes the *speaker*; and the same entity that comes to have
‘distrust,’ when he is faced by doubts regarding *what* and *how*
tilings are going to happen; so that there cun be no difference between
the two.”

This is quite true; but the statement in the text is based upon an
assumed distinction; just like the statement ‘one injures his soul by
his own soul’ (*Bhagavad-gitā*).—(90)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 674);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(35b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.89-97)**

\[See the texts under [79 *et
seq*.]\]
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अष्टौ श्लोकाः शूद्रशपथानुयोगार्थाः । एवम् एभिर् अनेकैर् वाक्यार्थप्रकारैः सत्यवचनार्थाः संप्[अद्यते] । यथा ब्राह्मणादिवर्णानुयोगानाम् ॥ ८.८९–९६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

096	'The gods are acquainted with no better man in this world than him, of whom his conscious Soul has no distrust, when he gives evidence.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/097_yAvato_bAndhavAn.md">
<details open><summary><h3>097 यावतो बान्धवान् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यावतो बान्धवान् यस्मिन्  
हन्ति साक्ष्ये ऽनृतं वदन् ।  
तावतः संख्यया तस्मिन्  
शृणु सौम्याऽनुपूर्वशः  ॥ ८.९७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/097_yAvato_bAndhavAn.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘Listen now, gentle friend, in due order, how many relatives, by number, one destroys by giving false evidence, in what cases.’—(97)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

द्रव्यविशेषानृताश्रयाः पापविशेषाः कूटसाक्षिण इत्य् एतत् प्रदर्शनार्थं प्रकरणम् आरभ्यते । तत्रायं श्लोकः संबोधनद्वारेणोपदिश्यमान[^३२३] आदरार्थः संपद्यते । यद् गुह्यं मिथ उपदिश्यते तद् यथाकथंचिद् भवतीत्य् अवधारितं ग्रहणं नातिगुरु इदं त्व् अतिमहाप्रयोजनम् अवहितैः श्रोतव्यम् इति ।


[^३२३]:
     M G: saṃbandho dhanadvāreṇo-

**सौम्येति** चैकवचनम् अनेकशिष्यसंनिधाने भृगाव् एव विवक्षितम् । **यस्मिन् साक्ष्य** इति व्यधिकरणसप्तमी । **यस्मिन्** द्रव्यभेदभिन्ने व्यवहारे यत् साक्ष्यं तत्र तन्निमित्तं यद् अनृतम् इत्य् एषा विषयसप्तमी । अपरा "यस्य च भावेन" (पाण् २.३.३७) इति । अथ वा द्रव्यभेदात् साक्ष्यभेदः, तत्र समानाधिकरण एव । **तावत** इति परिमाणे व्युत्पाद्यते । तत्र यत् प्रभूतनिमित्तम् अपि परिमाणं संभाव्यते, शिशून् स्त्रियो वृद्धान्[^३२४] इत्य् अतो[^३२५] विशिनष्टि- **संख्ययेति** । **अनुपूर्वश** इति सुखप्रतिपत्तये ऽनुपूर्वेण ह्य् अभिधीयमानं सुखेन प्रतीयते । आनुपूर्वी च संख्यागतात्राभिप्रेता । तस्या एव वक्ष्यमाणत्वात् "पञ्च पशु" इत्यादि" ॥ ८.९७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The present text introduces a section where it is pointed out that the
degree of sin committed by the perjurer varies with the nature of the
matter of the suit.

When this fact is asserted in the form of an address, it serves the
purpose of indicating its importance, when something is said in secret,
it is regarded as some slight matter, not of any importance; but what is
said now is important, and hence should be listened to with
attention,—such being the implication of the hortatory form adopted.

The term ‘*gentle friend*,’ in the singular form, is intended for
*Bhṛgu* alone from among the several whom Manu is instructing.

‘*Yaṣmin sākṣye*’;—the two locatives are not in apposition; the meaning
is—‘the false evidence that is given in regard to a certain
subject-matter’;—so that the locative denotes ‘*matter*,’ while the
locative absolute means something quite different. Or the diversity in
the *evidence* being in accordance with the diversity in the *matter*,
the two locatives may be in apposition also.

The term ‘*tāvat*’ is generally used to denote *extent*; and as *extent*
is of various kinds, the author specifies it as being ‘*by number*.’

‘*In due order*,’—for the purpose of easier understanding; when a
subject is stated in due order, it becomes easily understood. The
‘*order*’ meant here is with reference to the *number*; as it is number
that is going to be described in the following verses.—(97)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Hanti*’—‘Destroys—*i.e*., leads to hell’ (Medhātithi on 98, and
Nārāyaṇa and Kullūka);—‘makes to fall from heaven, or makes to be born
among lower animals’ (Rāghavānanda);—‘incurs the guilt of killing them’
(Kullūka, alternative).

‘*Saumya*’—Addressed to Bhṛgu (Medhātithi), but later on under 99, he
rejects the view and says that it must be taken as addressed to the
witness giving evidence.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 674);—in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Vyavahāra, p. 205);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru*, (35b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.89-97)**

\[See the texts under [79 *et
seq*.]\]
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

कूटसाक्षिणाम् एतत् तामि (?) कालपरिमाणार्थम् अधुना प्रकरणं आरभ्यते सर्वजातिसाक्ष्यार्थं सामर्थ्यात्, न केवलं प्रकरणाच् छूद्राणाम् एव । अतश् च चित्तप्रणिधानार्थं सर्वेषाम् एवायं श्लोक आरब्धः । कथं नाम । चित्तप्रणिधानाः साक्षिणः श्रुत्वैतन्मित्यावचनप्रत्यवायम् अतिमहन्तं निवर्तेरन् मिथ्यावचनाद् इति ॥ ८.९७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

097	'Learn now, O friend, from an enumeration in due order, how many relatives he destroys who gives false evidence in several particular cases.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/098_pancha_pashv-anRte.md">
<details open><summary><h3>098 पञ्च पश्व्-अनृते ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पञ्च पश्व्-अनृते हन्ति  
दश हन्ति गवानृते ।  
शतम् अश्वानृते हन्ति  
सहस्रं पुरुषानृते  ॥ ८.९८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/098_pancha_pashv-anRte.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘He destroys five by false evidence regarding animals; he destroys ten by false evidence regarding kine; he destroys a hundred by false evidence regarding horses, and a thousand by false evidence regarding men.’—(98)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**पशु**निमित्तम् अनृतम् । शाकपार्थिववत् समासः (पत् इ- ४०६) । **पञ्च**बान्धवांश् चानृतं **हन्ति** । ततश् च तेषां नरकपातनम् । मातापितरौ जायामिथुनं चापत्यम् इति पञ्च । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कथं पुनर् अन्यकृतेनैनसान्यस्य फलम् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्यकृतेन पुण्यपापादिनान्यस्य स्वर्गनरकादिप्राप्तिः[^३२६] संसर्गाद् इति ब्रूमः । तैर् अयं परित्यज्यत इत्य् उक्तं भवति । अथ वा तैर् हतैर् यत् पापं तद् अस्य भवतीत्य् अघ्नन्न् अपि **हन्तीत्य्** उच्यते, अदृष्टकार्यतुल्यत्वात् । 


[^३२६]:
     M G DK omit: anyakṛtena puṇyapāpādinānyasya svarganarakādiprāptiḥ

- अर्थवादश् चायं न तत्कार्योपदेशः । तत्कार्योपदेशे हि हिंसाप्रायश्चित्ती स्यात् । कौटसाक्ष्यप्रायश्चित्तम् एतद् भवति । उत्तरोत्तरसंख्यादिवृद्धिः प्रायश्चित्तगौरवार्था न पुनर् विवक्षितैव । तेनोत्तरोत्तरस्य गरीयः प्रायश्चित्तम् इत्य् उक्तं भवति । 

अयं पुरुषः कस्य दास इत्य् एवं संशये यद् अनृतं तत् **पुरुषानृतम्** उच्यते ॥ ८.९८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The compound ‘*paśvanṛtam*’ is to be expounded as
‘*paśunimittam-anṛtam*,’ ‘false evidence regarding animals,’—on the
analogy of the compound ‘*śākaparthivaḥ*.’

False evidence destroys five relatives;—this ‘destroying’ consists in
making them fall into hell;—the five relatives being—(1) the father, (2)
the mother, (3) the wife and (4-5) a couple of children (son and
daughter).

“How can the result of sin committed by one accrue to another?”

Our answer is that it is on account of association that one person goes
to heaven or to hell, by virtue of the virtuous or vicious acts
committed by another.

What is really meant is that the perjurer is abandoned by the said
relatives;—or, that ho incurs the sin that would accrue from the killing
of the relations; and hence even though not actually killing them, he is
described as ‘destroying’ them, on the ground that the spiritual effect
of the two acts is the same.

This however is a purely hortatory exaggeration; and it is not meant
that the man actually commits the act; if this latter were meant, then
the man would be subject to the expiatory rites prescribed in connection
with the actual *killing* of the said relatives; while as a matter of
fact, the perjurer is subjected to only those sites that have been
prescribed in connection with the sin of *perjury*.

The gradual increase in the number (of relatives destroyed) is meant to
indicate the increasingly heavier character of the expiation necessary;
and the statements are not meant to be taken as literally true. Hence
all that is meant is that each succeeding act of perjury (mentioned)
makes the man liable to a heavier expiation than the preceding one.

On being questioned as to the person to whom a certain slave belongs, if
the witness deposes falsely,—it is a case of ‘*false evidence regarding
men*.’— (98)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 674);—in *Smṛtisaroddhāra* (p.
336);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 220), which says that ‘*pañca*’,
‘five’, qualifies ‘*bandhavān*’ ‘relations,’ who have been mentioned in
the preceding verse;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 205);—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (35b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana* (1.19.12-13).—‘By false testimony regarding gold, he ruins
three ancestors; by false testimony regarding small cattle, he ruins
five; by false testimony regarding kine, he kills ten; he ruins a
hundred by false evidence regarding horses, and a thousand by false
evidence regarding man; a witness who speaks falsely about land ruins
the whole world.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.34).—‘He kills five by false testimony regarding a
maiden; ten by false testimony regarding kine, a hundred by false
testimony regarding a horse, and a thousand by false testimony regarding
a man.’

*Gautama* (13.14-15).—‘By false evidence concerning small cattle, a
witness kills ten; by that regarding cows, horses, men, or land,—in each
succeeding case, ten times as many as in the one preceding; or, by false
evidence regarding land, the whole human race.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पूर्वापरान् । यद् अयम् आह —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

098	'He kills five by false Testimony regarding (small) cattle, he kills ten by false testimony regarding kine, he kills a hundred by false evidence concerning horses, and a thousand by false evidence concerning men.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/099_hanti_jAtAn.md">
<details open><summary><h3>099 हन्ति जातान् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

हन्ति जातान् अजातांश् च  
हिरण्यार्थे ऽनृतं वदन् ।  
सर्वं भूम्य्-अनृते हन्ति  
मा स्म भूम्य्-अनृतं वदीः  ॥ ८.९९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/099_hanti_jAtAn.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘Deposing falsely in regard to gold, he kills the born as well as the unborn; by false evidence regarding land, he kills all; never tell a lie regarding land.’—(99)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^३२७]:
     DK: vadaḥ

<u>कथं</u> पुनर् अजातानाम् असति संसर्गे परकीयेन संयोगो येनेदम् उच्यते **हन्ति जातान् अजातांश् चेति** । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;उक्तम्, अर्थवादो ऽयम् इति । **सर्वं भूम्यनृतं** वदन्[^३२८] । **मा वादीः** भूमिसंबन्ध्य् असत्यम् । "स्मोत्तरे लङ् च" (पाण् ३.३.१७६) इति[^३२९] । मा वादीर् इत्यादरार्थम् अप्य् एतत्[^३३०] प्रत्यक्षं संबोधनम् । 


[^३३०]:
     M G DK: madhamena for apy etat


[^३२९]:
     J omits: smottare laṅ ca iti; DK adds: laṅvādaḥ


[^३२८]:
     M G: vadaḥ; DK reproduces the whole line: sarvaṃ bhūmyanṛte hanti mā sma bhūmyanṛtaṃ vadaḥ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;का पुनर् इयं भूमिर् नाम ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;यद् एतत् पृथिवीगोलकं पर्वतावष्टंभनं सागरावधि प्रसिद्धम् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;नन्व्[^३३१] इयत्याः कः स्वामी, को वापहर्ता । न हि सार्वभौमः कश्चिद् अस्ति । तथा च गाथा भूमेः- "न मा मर्त्यः कश्चन दातुम् अर्हति" (श्ब् १३.७.१.१५) । न कश्चित् सार्वभौमो ऽस्तीत्य् अभिप्रायः । "विश्वकर्मन् भौवन मां दिदासिथ"[^३३२] विश्वकर्मन्[^३३३] भौमनेति पितृव्यपदेशेन स्वनाम्ना च राज्ञो आमन्त्रणं[^३३४] श्रुतम् । माम् असौ दातुम्[^३३५] इच्छतीति । उपमैंष्यति[^३३६] सलिलस्य मध्ये निमज्जे ऽहम्, सलिलस्य मध्यम् । एवं संकल्पं वृथा संकल्पितवति त्वयि सलिले मज्जामि । सलिलमज्जनेन नैष्फल्यम् अत्र दानसंकल्पस्याह । यथा सलिले निक्षिप्तं निष्फलम् एवम् एतद् अपीति । मृषैष कश्यपाय संगरः । तवैष संगरः प्रतिश्रवः प्रतिज्ञानं कश्यपाय ददामीति मोघो वध्यो ऽस्तु, सर्वसादारणाहं सर्वजनोपभोग्या । केवलं राजानो रक्षानिर्बन्धमात्रभाज इत्य् अभिप्रायः । अत एतावत्या भूमेर् न दानापहारसंभव इति कुतो विवादः । 


[^३३६]:
     M G J: upamaiṣyati


[^३३५]:
     M G J: mayāsau rantum


[^३३४]:
     M G J: rājñāmantraṇaṃ


[^३३३]:
     M G J: viśvakarma-


[^३३२]:
     M G: viśvakarmā bhauvanam ādiśed; J: viśvakarman dāsitha bauvanamādi (clearly this passage has been transmitted badly; I follow DK, but I am not sure whether the editors of it have tried to create a sensible conjectural reading or are reproducing the reading of a good manuscript).


[^३३१]:
     M G: na tv

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;सत्यम् । यथैवायं भूमिशब्दो ऽत्र वर्तते एवं क्षेत्रग्रामस्थण्डिलादाव् अपि । तत्र च संभवत्य् एव स्वाम्यम् । प्रत्यक्षस्यैव दानापहाराव् इति न किंचिद् अनुपपन्नम् । अपहारश् चास्या यादृशेन रूपेण अपहारः गृहादेर् न वीरुद्विछेदः । अतश् च यः परकीये क्षेत्रे चक्रम्येत मृदो वा कश्चिद् आदद्यान् नासौ भूम्यपहारी स्यात् । मीमांसकैर् उक्तम् "न भूमिः स्यात् सर्वान् प्रत्यविशिष्टत्वात्" (प्म्स् ६.७.३) इति ।

- एकदेशवचनं च भूमिशब्दम् अधिकृत्य भगवान् कृष्णद्वैपायनो दानधर्मेषु पठितवान्-

- परैर् अप्य् अनुमन्तव्यो दानधर्मो नृपैर् भुवि ।

- अक्षयो हि निधिर् ब्राह्मो विहितो ऽयं महीभृताम् ॥ इति ।

कृत्स्नगोलकाभिप्रायम् एव नादेयत्वं भूमेर् विश्वजिति मीमांसकर् उक्तम्- "न भूमिः स्यात् सर्वान् प्रत्यविशिष्टत्वात्" (प्म्स् ६.७.३) इति । सर्वान् पुरुषान् प्रतिचंक्रमनादियोग्यतयाविशिष्टा भूमिः स्वामीकर्तुम् अशक्या कथं दीयत इत्य् अर्थः । अस्मिंस् तु पक्षे ग्रामनगरादि विश्वजिति दातव्यम् । 

<u>अन्ये तु</u> पठन्ति "अन्तरेण सदः पत्नीशालं च दक्षिणा नयन्ति" इति भूमौ गुणविधेर् अस्यासंभवात् क्षेत्रादेर् अप्य् अत्र दानम् ।  
**वदन्न्** इति चैकवचननिर्देशात् "शृणु सौम्य" (म्ध् ८.९७) इति साक्षिविषयम् एवैतत् संबोधनम्, न शिष्यविषयम् । "शूद्रम् एभिस् तु पातकैः" (म्ध् ८.८८) इत्य् अत आरभ्य, यावन्तो मधमपुरुषनिर्देशास् (म्ध् ८.९२) ते सर्वेषां पातकभूयस्त्वसमानाख्यातरूपाद्येकवाक्यत्वाच् छूद्रानुयोगार्थाः । "अन्धः शत्रुगृहं गच्छेत्" (म्ध् ८.९३) इत्य् अत आरभ्य, सर्वे साक्षिविषया अनुयोगाः । आख्यातवैरूप्येन प्रकरणस्य विच्छेदात्, मध्यमपुरुषे समानार्थक्रमत्वात्, कर्तव्यो गच्छेद् इति प्रथमपुरुषनिर्देशः पूर्वाधिकारनिवृत्त्यर्थः ॥ ८.९९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

*Question*—“How can association with the sinful person affect those not
yet born,—that it is said that *the man kills the born as well as the
unborn?*”

It has been already pointed out that all this is merely a hortatory
exaggeration.

‘He kills all by deposing falsely in regard to land; never tell a lie
regarding land’;—this direct form of address has been adopted for the
purpose of indicating the gravity of the offence.

*Question*—“What is it that is called *Land*?”

*Answer*—It is what is known as globe, the earth with hilly
protuberances, extending to the ocean.

*Objection*—“But who can be the owner of all this extensive earth? Who
too can take it away by force? For there is no king over the whole
earth. To this effect there is the earth’s song addressed to Viśvakarman
Bhauvana,—the latter term being his name derived from his father’s—‘no
mortal can give me away’;—which means that there is no one who owns the
entire earth,—‘I shall sink into the midst of the water, having heard
that he is desirous of haring intercourse with me,’—this sinking within
water implying the futility of the gift,—‘vain is thy promise to give me
away’—‘just as what Is thrown into the water becomes useless, so also is
your promise to give the Earth to Kaśyapa useless.’ (*Śatapatha
Brāhmaṇa*, 13. 7. 1. 15). The meaning of all this is that the earth is
the common property of all men, to be equally enjoyed by all; and kings
are appointed only for taking care of it. Thus then, cither the *giving
away* or the *taking away* of the whole extent of this earth being
impossible, how can there be any disputes regarding its possession?”

*Answer*—True; but, just as the entire earth is spoken of as ‘*bhūmi*,’
‘*land*,’ so also are Holds, villages and platforms and over these
latter, ownership is certainly possible; and the *making over* or the
*taking away* also of such ownership is directly perceptible; the
‘taking away’ of this consists in asserting ownership in an improper
manner; and the mere dismantling of a house or the cutting of a tree
does not constitute the act of ‘taking away.’ Hence if a man walks over
another man’s land, or takes clay out of it, ho is not said to ‘take
away the land.’

“But the *Mīmāṃsakas* have declared that ‘It cannot be the land, because
it is common to all’ (Jaimini, 6. 3. 3) \[where the word ‘land’ stands
for the whole earth\].”

But the term is found to be used in the sense also of *parts of the
earth*, by the revered Kṛṣṇadvaipāyana, who has declared as follows, in
course of the description of the duty of charity—‘On the earth the king
should permit the duty of charity by others also; this is a sacred
treasure laid down for kings’ \[which refers to the gift of land\]. As
for the assertion of the Mīmāṃsakas regarding ‘land’ being ‘common to
all,’—this refers to the entire globe, to roam about over which all men
are equally entitled, and which therefore, cannot he *owned* by any one;
how then could it be given away? In accordance with this view, villages
and towns can be given away at the *Viśvajit* sacrifice. Others however
quote the words ‘they present as sacrificial fee, the *bhūmi with the
exception of the platform and the wife’s room*,’—and explain, that,
since any such exception would not be applicable to the entire earth,
the giving must refer to *fields* and such other parts of it only.

In view of the term ‘*vadīḥ*’ (singular) in this verse, the words
‘listen, gentle sir’ (of verse 97) should he taken as addressed to the
*witness*, and not to the *pupil*.

All the words in the second person contained in verse 88 onwards (up to
92) are meant to be addressed to the *śūdra* witness, as is clear from
the gravity of the offence indicated, and also from the similarity in
the verbal forms used;—while from verse 93 onwards are to be addressed
to all witnesses. That such a break in the construction is intended is
shown by the adopting of a different verbal form;—the Second Person is
used in the former set of verses while in the latter we have the Third
Person, which clearly indicates dissociation from the previous
context.—(99).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Sarvam hanti*’—‘Destroys everything—*i*. *e*., incurs the guilt of
killing *all animate beings*’ (Kullūka and Govindarāja);—‘destroys even
more than a thousand beings’ (Nārāyaṇa);—‘destroys the entire universe’
(Nandana).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana* (1.19.12).—(See under 98.)

*Gautama* (13.6).—‘By false evidence regarding land, one destroys the
whole human race.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

नन्व् इयं श्रुतिर् विरुध्यते । "न मां मर्त्यः कश्चन दातुम् अर्हति" इति । अतश् च स्वामित्वाभावः । तदभावाद् व्यवहाराभावः । ततश् च वादाभावे तदनृतदोषाभावः साक्षिणाम् इति । तच् च न । अर्थापरिज्ञानात् । न हि कश्चित् समर्थः कृत्स्नाम् दातुं विजयस्याभावाद् इत्य् एषो ऽत्रार्थः, दानापहारमिथ्यावचनेषु गुणदोषप्रदर्शनशास्त्रारम्भसामर्थ्यात् । तथा च व्यासादयः- "षष्टिवर्षसहस्राणि स्वर्गे तिष्ठति भूमिदः, आच्छेत्ता चानुमन्ता च तान्य् एव नरके वसेत्" इति । भूमिछलार्थत्वेव दानापहारादय इत् केचित् । तच् चैतद् विचारणीयम् । मीमांसादर्शणं तु "न भूमिः स्यात् सर्वान् प्रत्य् अविशिष्टत्वात्" इति सर्वान् दक्षिणार्थान् गुणविधीन् प्रत्य् अविशिष्टत्वात् । दक्षिणाद्रव्येषु हि गुणः श्रूयते "अन्तरेण सदः पत्नीशाले दक्षिणां नयन्ति" इति । स चायं गुणविधिर् अत्यन्ताशक्यः पृथिव्याम् । ततो ऽस्माद् अन्यत्राप्य् अपहारदोषः स्यात् । एवं च तद्विवादे ऽनृतदोषः साक्षिणां सिद्धः । सर्वस्य च कार्यस्य पृथिवीकारणत्वात् तद् **अनृते सर्वं हन्तीत्य्** उच्यते । एवं च पुरुषाभिनयेन स्मृतिः सादरं वारयति **मा स्म भूम्यन्र्तं वदिः** ॥ ९.९९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

099	'By speaking falsely in a cause regarding gold, he kills the born and the unborn; by false evidence concerning land, he kills everything; beware, therefore, of false evidence concerning land.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/100_apsu_bhUmivad.md">
<details open><summary><h3>100 अप्सु भूमिवद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अप्सु भूमिवद् इत्य् आहुः  
स्त्रीणां भोगे च मैथुने ।  
अब्जेषु चैव रत्नेषु  
सर्वेष्व् अश्ममयेषु च  ॥ ८.१०० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/100_apsu_bhUmivad.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘That concerning water they declare to be similar to that concerning land; as also that relating to the sexual enjoyment of women, and to gems, water-born as well as granitic.’—(100)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कूपतडागादिस्थे महति जले स्वल्पे वा[^३३७] **भूमिवद्** दोषः । **स्त्रीणां भोगे च मैथुना**ख्ये- केनेयं स्त्री भुक्ता मैथुनधर्मेणेति । **अब्जेषु रत्नेषु** मनयो रत्नानि मुक्ताद्याः । **अश्ममयेषु** वैडूर्यादिषु । **रत्नेष्व्** इति संबध्यते । द्विविधान्य् एव रत्नानि जलजान्य् अश्ममयानि च । अतो रत्नग्रहण एव कर्तव्ये विशेषणद्वयोपादानं श्लोकपूरणार्थम् । अद्भ्यो जातान्य् **अब्जानि** । अश्मनो विकारा **अश्ममयानि** ॥ ८.१०० ॥


[^३३७]:
     M G: svalpe 'pi sahopakāro; DK (1: 268): svalpe 'pi khalv apahāre



##### ०२
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The sin accruing from false evidence relating to the water—much or
little—contained in wells, tanks and other reservoirs—is similar to that
in the ease of land.

‘*Sexual enjoyment of women*’;—*i.e*., in answer to the question—‘by
whom has this woman been ravished sexually.’

‘*Water-born gems*,’—such as the pearl;—‘*granitic gems*’—the emerald
and the like;—the term ‘*gems*’ being construed both ways. There are
various kinds of gems, waterborn and granitic; hence all that was
necessary was to mention the ‘*gems*’ only; and the mention of the
qualifying epithet must he taken only as serving the purpose of filling
up the metre.

‘*Water-born*’—produced in water.

‘*Granitic*’—formed from stones.—(100)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 205),—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru*.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (13.18-19).—‘By false evidence regarding water, one incurs the
same guilt as in that regarding land; likewise by false evidence
regarding criminal intercourse.’
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

100	'They declare (false evidence) concerning water, concerning the carnal enjoyment of women, and concerning all gems, produced in water, or consisting of stones (to be) equally (wicked) as a lie concerning land.
</details>
</details>
</div>

  
## 101-150
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/101_etAn_doShAn.md">
<details open><summary><h3>101 एतान् दोषान् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एतान् दोषान् अवेक्ष्य त्वं  
सर्वान् अनृतभाषणे ।  
यथाश्रुतं यथादृष्टं  
सर्वम् एवाऽञ्जसा वद  ॥ ८.१०१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/101_etAn_doShAn.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘Having noticed all these evils proceeding prom perjury, speak out directly everything exactly what you have seen and heard.’—(101)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

ऊहापोहौ वर्जयित्वा यथादृष्टं यथाश्रुतं चादृष्टं[^१] तत्वेन ब्रूहि ॥ ८.१०१ ॥


[^१]:
     DK (1: 268) omits: cādṛṣṭaṃ; M G: dṛṣṭaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Give up all suspense and hesitation, speak out what you have seen and
heard.—(101)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Añjasā*’—‘Without hesitation or śilly-shallying (Medhātithi);—‘truly’
(Govindarāja and Kullūka);—‘quickly’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 674);—in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Vyavahāra, p. 205), which explains ‘*añjasā*’ as ‘with a clear
heart’;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (35b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 675).—‘When they have assembled, they should
say exactly what they have seen or heard.’

[\[See texts under
74.\]]
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अमी पञ्च श्लोकाः सर्वसाक्षिसाधारणाः, अमृतवचनप्रतिषेधविद्वेषणार्था अर्थवादाः, न फलविधयः । अकृताभ्यागमकृतविप्रणाशदोषप्रसङ्गात् । एवं च प्रतिपुरुषं शास्त्राधिकारो हीयेत । आनर्थक्यं चास्य स्यात् । येन स्वकृतकर्मफलभोगः शास्त्रस्यार्थवत्त्वम् । अतः शास्त्रविरोधान् न्यायविरोधाच् च प्रतिषेधार्थवादा एवैते विज्ञेयाः ॥ ८.१००–१०२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

101	'Marking well all the evils (which are produced) by perjury, declare thou openly everything as (thou hast) heard or seen (it).'
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/102_goraxakAn_vANijikAMs.md">
<details open><summary><h3>102 गोरक्षकान् वाणिजिकांस् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

गोरक्षकान् वाणिजिकांस्  
तथा कारु-कुशीलवान् [मेधातिथिपाठः - वाणिजकांस्] ।  
प्रेष्यान् वार्धुषिकांश् चैव  
विप्रान् शूद्रवद् आचरेत्  ॥ ८.१०२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/102_goraxakAn_vANijikAMs.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

‘He shall treat like Śūdras the Brāhmaṇas who tend cattle, who engage in trade, and who are craftsmen, actors, menial servants ok money-lenders.’—(102)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**कारवः** शिल्पिनस् तक्षायस्कारसूपकरादयः । **कुशीलवा** नर्तकगायनाद्याः । **प्रेष्या** जीविकार्थं परस्याज्ञाकारा दासा इति प्रसिद्धाः । **वार्धुषिका** वृद्ध्युपजीविनः । एते ब्राह्मणा अपि सन्तः प्रकरणात् साक्ष्ये शपथे च **शूद्रवद्** द्रष्टव्या न क्रियान्तरे । यथा शूद्रो न दानपुण्यादिना पृच्छ्यन्ते साक्ष्ये शपथे चाग्निहरणादिना शोध्यते तद्वद् एषो ऽपि शपथो यद्य् अपि पूर्वत्राप्रकृतः तथाप्य् उत्तरत्रानन्तर्याद् दोषवत्वात् प्रयतत्वात् प्रयतत्वे ऽप्य् आनन्तर्यस्य संबन्धहेतुत्वाद् वक्ष्यमाणस्यापि प्रत्यासत्त्या पूर्ववद् वयोसंनिपातात् शपथे ऽपि तुल्यम् ॥ ८.१०२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Craftsmen*’—artisans; carpenters, blacksmiths, cooks and so forth.

‘*Actors*’—dancers and singers.

‘*Menial servants*,’—those who serve others for a living; known as
‘*dāsa*.’

‘*Money-lenders*,’—who live upon interest on money lent.

These persons, even though they he Brāhmaṇas, should, in the matter of
taking evidence and administering ordeals,—that this is meant is dear
from ‘the context—he ‘*treated*’—*i.e*., questioned—‘*like Śūdras*’; but
not so in other matters. That is to say, in taking evidence, the *Śūdra*
is not questioned with reference to charity, virtue and the like, and in
ordeals, he is subjected to the ordeal by fire; and the same treatment
should be meted out to the persons mentioned here.

Though *ordeal* has not yet been spoken of in the present context, yet
what is said here is taken as applying to the case of ordeals also,
because they are dealt with immediately after the present section, and
immediate sequence also is a basis of relationship; the two subjects
therefore are closely interrelated.—(102)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 674), and again on p. 681, as
indicating that in certain eventualities even a Brāhmaṇa may be
condemned to death;—in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 19);—in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Rajānīti, p. 268), which refers to *Aparārka* and adds that the term
‘*viprām*’ here stands for the illiterate Brhāmaṇa who does
cattle-tending &c., as also for such Kṣatriyas and Vaiśyas as are
addicted to degraded vocations;—in *Hemādri* (Dāna, p. 35 and Śrāddha,
p. 359);—in *Prāyascittaviveka* (p. 384);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra,
p. 205).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana* (1.10.24).—‘Let him treat as Śūdras those Brāhmaṇas who
tend cattle, or live by trade, or are artisans, actors, servants or
usurers.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रकरणाद् ब्राह्मणशपथानुयोगापवादः । "शूद्रम् एभिस् तु पातकैः" इति वचनात् । एषां गोरक्षकादीनां ब्राःमणानाम् एव सतां शूद्रशपथानुयोगः । एवं च नान्यत्र प्रयोजने शूद्रवद् आचरणम् । इतरथा प्रकरणम् उपरुध्येत ॥ ८.१०३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

102	Brahmanas who tend cattle, who trade, who are mechanics, actors (or singers), menial servants or usurers, the (judge) shall treat like Sudras.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/103_tad_vadan.md">
<details open><summary><h3>103 तद् वदन् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

तद् वदन् धर्मतो ऽर्थेषु  
जानन्न् अप्य् अन्य्था नरः ।  
न स्वर्गाच् च्यवते लोकाद्  
दैवीं वाचं वदन्ति ताम्  ॥ ८.१०३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/103_tad_vadan.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In some cases, a man who, though knowing the truth, deposes otherwise, through piety, does not fall off from heaven. This is a divine assertion that they reproduce.—(103)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**तद्** अन्यथापि **जानन्न् अन्यथा** **वदन् न स्वर्गाद्** भ्रश्यति । कूटम् अपि वदन् न दुष्यतीत्य् अर्थः । किं सर्वदैव । नेत्य् आह । **धर्मतो ऽर्थेषु** । धर्मेण दयादिना निमित्तेनार्थेषु व्यवहारेषु । धर्मस्य च निमित्तत्वम् उक्तम् उत्तरश्लोके दर्शयिष्यति । एतच् च न स्वमनीषिकयोच्यते । किं तर्ह्य् **एतां वाचम् वदन्ति** अस्मात् पूर्वे ऽपि स्मर्तारः[^३] । का पुनर् दैवी वाक् । ययास्मिन् निमित्ते ऽनृतं वदितव्यम् इत्य् एषा देवानां संबन्धिनी वाक् **तां** मन्वादयः श्रुत्वा **वदन्तीति** विशेषे ऽनृतप्रशंसा । 


[^३]:
     M G: 'vismartāraḥ

<u>अन्यैस्</u> तु पूर्वविधिशेषतयायं श्लोको व्याख्यातः । तद् एतद् गोरक्षकादिष्व् अनुयोगवाक्येषु ब्राह्मणेषु भवितव्यम् । अन्यथा ब्राःमणेषु "सत्यं ब्रूहि" (म्ध् ८.८८) इति यथा ब्राह्मणा एते कथं शूद्रवद् अनुयोज्या इति तद्विदान् अपि न दुष्यतीति यतो मन्वादयः एवंविधां वाचं वदन्ति यथैते शूद्रवद् आचरणीया[^४] इति । ते च धर्माधर्मयोः प्रमाणम् । तैश् च सत्यं वदितव्यम् । तच् च यथाविहितं तत्र स एव धर्मो यत्र वानृतं तत्रानृताभिधानम् एव धर्म इति ॥ ८.१०३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Though deposing otherwise than the truth, the man does not fall off from
heaven; *i.e*., even though he has given false evidence, he does not
incur sin.

“Is this so at all times?”

The text proceeds to say that it is not so always; but only in cases
where it is done ‘*through piety*,’—*i.e*., through such pious motives
as pity and the like; ‘*cases*’ means *suits*. How piety forms the
motive is going to be shown in the next verse.

What is said here by the author is not out of his own mind; even
previous writers on Smṛti have reproduced this ‘divine assertion.’ “What
divine assertion?”—The assertion that ‘one should give false evidence
from considerations of piety’ has *emanated from the gods*; and having
heard that, Manu and other writers have reproduced it.

This is only a praising of false evidence under special circumstances.

Others however have explained this verse as supplementing the previous
injunction; and under this explanation what is said here should apply to
what has been said regarding the cattle—tenders and other Brāhmaṇas
being exhorted like *Śūdras*, when asked to give evidence. People might
ask how a Brāhmaṇa should be exhorted like a *Śūdra*; and the text
explains that there can be nothing wrong in this, since Manu and other
writers have made the declaration that they are to be treated as Śūdras,
and they are the sole authority in matters relating to right and wrong.

Witnesses should tell the truth; and that in the manner in which it is
enjoined; so that in a case where lying is righteous, that should he
regarded as right.—103
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Buhler wrongly says that Nandana omits this verse; Hopkins is equally
inaccurate in saying that Nandana places this verse after 104.

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (38a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bṛhaspati* (7.34).—‘Let him preserve, even by telling a lie, a Brāhmaṇa
who has sinned once through error and is in peril of his life, and is
oppressed by rogues and others.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्राङ्(ड्?)विवाकस् तच् छूद्रानुयोगवचनम् अन्यथा गोरक्षकादिषु ब्राह्मणेषु वदन् धर्मतो ऽर्थेषु व्यवहारेषु, ये साक्षिणः तेषु जानन्न् अपि यथावर्णम् अनुयोगं नाधर्मेण युज्यते । येन दैवीं शास्त्रवतीम् वाचं वदन्ति तां स्मृत्वा मन्वादयः "विप्रान् शूद्रवद् आचरेत्" इति । अस्यानन्तरविधेः स्तुत्यर्थवादः ॥ ८.१०४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

103	In (some) cases a man who, though knowing (the facts to be) different, gives such (false evidence) from a pious motive, does not lose heaven; such (evidence) they call the speech of the gods.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/104_shUdra-viT-xatra-viprANAM_yatra.md">
<details open><summary><h3>104 शूद्र-विट्-क्षत्र-विप्राणां यत्र ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

शूद्र-विट्-क्षत्र-विप्राणां  
यत्र र्तोक्तौ भवेद् वधः ।  
तत्र वक्तव्यम् अनृतं  
तद् +धि सत्याद् विशिष्यते  ॥ ८.१०४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/104_shUdra-viT-xatra-viprANAM_yatra.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Where the telling of the truth would lead to the death of a Śūdra, a Vaiśva, a Kṣatriya or a Brāhmaṇa,—in that case falsehood should be spoken; as that is preferable to truth.—(104)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तत्र नानृतं वदेद् इति यः प्रतिषेधस् तस्याशूद्रादिविषयतानेनोच्यते, न पुनर् अनृतवदनं विधीयते । तथा सति प्रतिषेधेनैकवाक्यता बाध्येत ।[^५] 


[^५]:
     DK (1: 272) add: anye tu naimittikadharmādhikāraṃ manyamānāḥ kalpanām apavadante |

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;का पुनर् अत्र निमित्तश्रुतिः । **तत्रेति** । तस्य वधविशेषणत्वान् न वधः, तस्यासतो निमित्तत्वानुपपत्तेः । अतश् च कृते वधे[^६] पश्चात् तद्विषयम् अतद्विषयं वानृतं वक्तव्यम् इत्य् अर्थ आपतति । तत्त्वनिष्ठम्[^७] । 


[^७]:
     M G add: na


[^६]:
     M G: 'vadhau

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च **यत्रेति** व्यवहारवस्तु[^८] निर्दिश्यते, पुनर् **तत्रेति** तद् एव प्रतिनिर्दिश्यते । ततश् च यस्मिन् व्यवहारे पराजिताः सन्तो वधार्हा भवन्ति तस्य नानुपनन्नो निमित्तभावः । 


[^८]:
     M G: vyavahārastutir

- अत्र वदन्ति । न चात्र वधर्हेष्व् अनृतम् इष्यते । यतो ऽननुरूपं पापीयसो[^९] जिवनम् इति । यस् त्व् अवधर्हो ऽवकाशात् पुरदास्यादिस्खलिताद् अनृताख्यापनाय राजानः[^१०] स्वल्पाराधात् न घातयितीत्य् उपपत्तिः;[^११] राजत्वात्[^१२] क्रोधदण्डस्य चाशास्त्रीयत्वाद् अस्थितपरिमाणतया निश्चयाभावो न तस्यापि निमित्तत्वोपपत्तिः । अतः प्रतिषेधशेषतैव न्याय्या । 


[^१२]:
     J: rājasatvāt


[^११]:
     M G J: ghātayitvopapatti (this whole passage has been corrupted; I have followed DK, but the readings are uncertain).


[^१०]:
     M G J: yas tv avadharhān avakāśān na puradāsyādiskhalitād anuhatadaṇḍatākhyāpanāya vā janaiḥ


[^९]:
     M G: yata ānurūpāpīyaso; J: yato 'niṣṭaṃ pāpīyaso

- गौतमीये त्व् अनृतविध्याशङ्कापि नास्ति । "नानृतवदने दोषो जिवनं चेत् तदधीनम्" (ग्ध् १३.२४) इत्य् एवमादिप्रतिषेधे सत्यानृतयोः कामचारप्रसङ्गे सत्यवचनेन वधे[^१३] निमित्तभावः प्रतिपद्यमानो "न हिंस्यात् सर्वभूतानि" इति प्रतिषेधव्यतिकर्मभये[^१४] चानृतं प्रतिपद्यत इति युक्तिमत् । तेनेदं[^१५] कृतम्, न चेद् असौ पृष्ट आचष्टे, न पुनर् हन्ति, अघ्नंश् च कथं हिमादोषेणानुषज्यते । 


[^१५]:
     M G J: yuktimatvenedaṃ


[^१४]:
     M G J: -vyatikarmatayā


[^१३]:
     M G J omit: vadhe

- अथ सत्य् अपि स्वातन्त्र्ये तद्वचनेन राज्ञा हन्यमानत्वात् तद्धेतुभावापत्त्या प्रयोजककर्तृत्वम् इति चेत्, न सर्वो हेतुः प्रयोजकः- धनेन कुलं विद्यया यश इति । भवति विद्यायशसोर्[^१६] हेतुता[^१७] प्रयोक्त्री । न[^१८] चान्य एवायं लौकिकफलोत्पत्तियोग्यतालक्षणो[^१९] हेतुभावः, अपि तु द्रव्यगुणाः । यत्रापि[^२०] क्रिया श्रूयते अग्निना पाक इति, सापि स्वरूपेण सिद्धरूपाभिधानात् कृदन्तैर् भावस्य । अन्यश् चायं शास्त्रीयः कर्तृव्यापारस्य प्रयोजको हेतुर् न तु तत्प्रयोजकत्वम् एवम् इत्य् अर्थम् । यदि तावत् प्रेषणाध्येषणे आज्ञाप्रार्थनारूपे प्रयोजकत्वं शोषयते[^२१] व्रीहीन् आतप इत्यादाव् अचेतनेषु णिजुत्पत्तिर् दुर्लभा । 


[^२१]:
     J: sādhyete


[^२०]:
     M G DK: -dravyaguṇeṣv atrāpi


[^१९]:
     M G J: - yogyatāhetulakṣaṇe


[^१८]:
     M G DK: nanu


[^१७]:
     M G J: hetunā


[^१६]:
     J: vidyā yaśaso

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च परिहृतम् एतद्व्याख्यातृभिः, "मुख्योपचरितक्रिय" इति चेतनावद् वस्तूपचारे "भिक्षा वासयति" "कारीषो ऽध्यापयति" इति । न ह्य् अत्र चैतन्यकृत उपकारः, अपि तु निश्चितत्वात् तदन्यस्य प्रयोजकस्य । अध्ययनं ह्य् आचार्यकरणविधिप्रयुक्तं कुर्वाणस्य माणवकस्य शीतादिलक्षणं प्रतिबन्धकम् अनुवदति । कारीषे प्रयोजकत्वाध्यारोपः । प्रेरकत्वाद् धि प्रयोजकम् उच्यते । तच् चाचैतन्यस्य[^२२] वायुजलादेर् अग्निकाष्ठादौ सुतरां दृश्यते । तदा विधिप्रयोजकस्तुतिप्रयोक्तृभिः प्रेषणाद्याभावाद् गौणार्थाः शब्दाः स्युः । अथैतत्स्थम् अर्थाचरणं प्रयोजकत्वं तच् च प्रयोजकस्य व्यापारानुगुणं प्रेषणादिव्यतिरिक्तक्रियान्तरावरणं संविधानाख्यम् । संविधान एव हि कारयतीत्य् उच्यते । यथा बुभुक्षमाणस्य कश्चित् पात्रम् आहरत्य् अन्यो भक्तम् उपनयति । कस्यचिद् वधप्रवृत्तस्य कश्चिद् आयुध्म् अर्पयत्य् अन्यो वध्यदोषाविष्करणेन मन्युम् उपदीपयति । एवंलक्षणः प्रेषित्रादिरूपरहितः सव्यापारः प्रयोज्यफलसिद्धाव् आनुकूल्यं प्रतिपद्यमानस् तत्समर्थाचरणपक्षे प्रयोजकः । 


[^२२]:
     M G: -ca caitanyasya

- अस्मिन् पक्षे कारीषोपाध्यायौ तुल्यौ प्राप्नुतः । 

- अत्रापि यम् अन्तरेण क्रियाया अनिवृत्तिर् यस्य च कारकविशेषसंज्ञा न प्रवर्तेत स मुख्यः प्रयोजकः कर्ता । अध्यायितारं चान्तरेण कारीषो न शक्नोत्य् अध्ययनहेतुभावं प्रतिपत्तुम् । आचार्यस् तु तम् अन्तरेणापि शक्त एवेति गौणः कारीषः । यत्र च करणादिभावो[^२३] निश्चितो[^२४] हेतुमत्प्रत्ययदर्शनात् तत्रापि गौणार्थतैव । यथा कश्चित् स्वल्पेनापि प्रयोजनेन दूरं ग्रामं पुनः पुनर् गतवन्तं दृष्ट्वा ब्रवीति "अश्वो गमयति देवदत्तम्" इति । यत्र तु न कस्यचिद् आसत्तिविप्रकर्षाव् अन्तरङ्गबहिरङ्गभावो वा गम्यते तत्र यावन्तस् तदानुकूल्यं प्रतिपद्यन्ते सर्वे ते प्रयोजकाः ।


[^२४]:
     M G: niścita-; DK: niścite


[^२३]:
     M G DK: -bhāve

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च कारकसंज्ञायाम् अन्तरङ्गयोगो नास्तीति को विशेषः कारीषोपाद्याययोः । स्वप्रक्रियैव सा तत्रभवताम् । न वस्त्वाश्रया । वस्त्वाश्रयौ च विधिप्रतिषेधौ । इदम् अपि तत्र पठ्यते- "विवक्षातः कारकाणि भवन्ति" इति । एवं च सति यत्राकर्तुर् एव कर्तृत्वं कश्चिद् विवक्षेत् तत्र कर्तृप्रत्ययविधिप्रतिषेधाव् अपि स्याताम् । यथा पातकपरिगणनायाम् अनुपठति "क्रविक्रयी संस्कर्ता चोपहर्ता च" (म्ध् ५.५१) इति । तस्माद् अन्वाख्यानसिद्ध्यर्था[^२५] तावकी[^२६] सा व्यवस्था न वस्त्वधिष्ठानम् अर्थम् अवस्कन्दति । 


[^२६]:
     M G DK: tāntrikī


[^२५]:
     M G DK: -arthaṃ

- अत एव व्याख्यातृभिर् उक्तम्- समर्थाचरणं चेद् धेतुः हेतुमात्रे[^२७] प्रसङ्गः । ततश् च यो ऽपि कस्मैचिद् भोजनं ददाति स चौदरिकतयातिसौहित्येन व्यापद्येत प्राप्तं तत्र दातुर् वधकर्तृत्वम् इति । न च तत्प्रयुक्तं भवति । क्रियान्तरेण ह्य् असौ निश्चितो भोजनाख्यप्रयोजको न वधो न वेर्ष्यादि[^२८] कथंचिन् निमित्तं भवति । भवतु वा तन्निमित्तम्,[^२९] प्रयोजकत्वाभावात् तु कर्तृत्वं नास्तीति ब्रूमः । यस्य तु भूमिसुवर्णापहारादिनापराध्येत स च तदपहारमन्युना कथंचिन् म्रियेत किं तत्रापहर्तुर् अपहारदोष एवोत वधे ऽपि[^३०] निमित्तिभाव इति चिन्त्यम् । 


[^३०]:
     M G: evobhayavadhe 'pi


[^२९]:
     M G DK omit: vā tannimittam


[^२८]:
     M G DK: vairṣyādi


[^२७]:
     M G DK: vyākhyātṛbhis tatsamarthācaraṇaṃ ced dhetumātre

- किम् अत्र चिन्त्यते । अव्यभिचारावगम्यत्वाद् धेतुहेतुमद्भावस्य न खड्गप्रहारभोजनविच्छेदादेर् इव भूम्यादिहरणस्य नियतनिमित्तत्वोपपत्तिः । 

- को ऽयं नियमो ऽभिप्रेतः । यदि ह वा केचिन् म्रियन्ते केचिन् नेत्य् अनियतो नियमो भवति । पुरुषस्वभावभेदात् तद् एवौषधं श्लेष्मिकाय हितं[^३१] विपरीतम् अन्यस्येति । सर्वेषाम् एव च भावानादेशकालस्वभावभेदसहकारिसापेक्षः[^३२] शक्त्यन्तरप्रादुर्भावः । तद् एव लक्षणं पुरुषवित्तसंततिसापेक्षं पिपासाहेतुप्राण्यन्तरसापेक्ष्यं तद्विच्छेदहेतुर् इति । एवम् अत्यन्तामर्षिणो मन्युमतः स्वहरणपरिभवादि मरणाय कल्पते । किं तत्र शक्यो निमित्तभावो ऽपह्नोतुम् । पेशलमानसस्य तूपेक्षैव तत्र । ये पुनर् मन्युपरीता अनशनश्वभ्रपतनविषभक्षणादिनापराद्धारम्[^३३] उद्द्यिश्य म्रियेरंस् तत्राप्य् एष एव न्यायः । 


[^३३]:
     M G DK: -ādināparān dvāram


[^३२]:
     M G DK bhāvānāṃ deśa-; M G: -sāpekṣā


[^३१]:
     M G: śleṣmikopahitaṃ; DK: śleṣmikasya hitaṃ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु चान्यस्यैव प्रसिद्धहेतुभावस्य विषभक्षणादेर् निमित्तस्य तत्र दर्शनान् न भूम्यादिहरणस्यापराधो हन्तृत्वम् आप्नुयात् । तेनोपजनितमन्युर्[^३४] मरणहेतोः प्रवर्तत इति पारंपर्यतो निमित्तत्वम् इति चेत् । एवं सति पथ्योपदेशेनापि केचिद्[^३५] उद्विजमाना आत्मानं व्यापादयन्ति, ततश् च तत्रोपदेष्टारो हन्तारः स्युः । तथा मत्सरिणः परद्रव्येष्व् ईर्ष्यया शुष्यन्ता[^३६] धनिषु दोषम् आददीरन् । तथान्ये मूढमनसः प्रियान् पुत्रान् स्वामिनश् चानुम्रियन्ते, तत्र प्रियादीनाम् हन्तृतापत्तिः । अपरे च रूपवत्स्त्रीदर्शनेन परिफल्गुमनसो ऽसूयन्ते[^३७] भज्यमानहृदयाश् च विवेकशून्यात्मानस्[^३८] तत्र शीलवत्यः स्त्रियो दुष्येयुः । तद् एवेदम् आपतितं मृतस्य ब्रह्महत्येति । 


[^३८]:
     M G: vivekasūtyātmānas


[^३७]:
     M G: -manasaḥ sūyante; DK: -manasaḥ śrūyante


[^३६]:
     M G DK: śuṣyanto


[^३५]:
     M G DK: kiṃcid


[^३४]:
     M G: -manyu-

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;सत्यम् एवं यदि विधिप्रतिषेधविशेषो न स्यात् । विहितो हितोपदेशः प्रतिषिद्धं स्वहरणादि । तथा चाहुः ।

- उपकारप्रवृत्तानां कथंचिद् चेद् विपर्ययः ।

- न तत्र दोषः केषांचिद् भेषजाम् औषधी यथा ॥

अत्र न केवलं वैद्यादेर् आतुरोपकारार्थिनः प्रयुक्तौषधस्य कथंचिद् विपरीततयोपपत्ताव् अदोषः- किं तर्ह्य् अन्यस्यापि गवादेर् महति पङ्के निमग्नस्योद्धर्तृभुजाकर्षणाय यथाश्रमेण यदि व्यापत्तिर् न तत्रोद्धर्त्ता दुष्येद् इति कथितं भवति । एवं सर्वत्र ।

- यो ऽपि कस्मिंश्चित् स्वव्यापारानुष्ठानवति धनरूपातिशयसंपद्वति दृश्यमाने दन्दह्यते न तं प्रति कस्यचिच् छास्त्रार्थातिक्रमः । निश्चितो हि निमित्तभावः[^३९] प्रतिषेधस्य विषयो भवितुम् अर्हति । न च प्राण्यन्तराश्रयिषु चैतसिकेषु[^४०] धर्मेषु प्रतिक्षणम् अन्यथाभवत्सु स्वभावविशेषावसायः । न हि शक्यम् अवसादितुम् अयम् अस्या रूपसंपदा व्यापद्यत इति । न च निश्चिते प्रतिषेधविषये संभवत्य् अनिश्चितविषयता न्याय्या । 


[^४०]:
     M G DK: caitanikeṣu


[^३९]:
     M G: nimittābhāvaḥ

- यत्र तर्हि कथंचिद् वर्णविपर्ययशरीरशोषणादिना कुतार्किकपरीता[^४१] स्याद् अपि निमित्तावगतिस् तत्र किं भ्रंशयितुं शीलं संयुज्यतां कामिना,[^४२] भवतु वा पुरुषघापिनीति[^४३] । 


[^४३]:
     M G: puruṣavyāpinīti; DK: puruṣavyāpattir iti


[^४२]:
     M G: kāmināṃ; DK: kāminyā


[^४१]:
     M G DK: kutārkikapaṭhitā

- नैतद् एवम् । न हीदृशी भवन्त्य् अपि निमित्तता प्रतिषेधस्य विषयः,[^४४] विध्यन्तरविरोधात् । अस्ति ह्य् अत्र व्यभिचारप्रतिषेधविधिः । न वापि[^४५] विध्यन्तरेणानवष्टब्धे विषये कृतावकाशा विधयो विरोधविध्यन्तरं विषयम् आस्कन्दितुम् अर्हन्ति । ये ऽपि मन्यन्ते रागलक्षणां प्रवृत्तिं शीलसंरक्षणोपदेशो निषेधति न शास्त्रलक्षणाम् । तेन महानुभावतया मास्य[^४६] तपस्विनो जीवितम्[^४७] उच्छेत्सीद् इति[^४८] प्राणोज्जिहीर्षया मुमूर्षुणा संप्रयुज्यते नासौ व्यभिचारप्रतिषेधम् अतिक्रामेत् । यत् तु विध्यन्तरविषये न विध्यन्तरं प्रवर्तत इति नैवायं विध्यन्तरस्य विषयो रागलक्षणत्वात् । 


[^४८]:
     M G: cecchediti; DK: vicchindyāt iti


[^४७]:
     M G: jīvituṃ


[^४६]:
     M G DK: nāsya


[^४५]:
     DK: cāpi


[^४४]:
     M G: viṣaya-

<u>ननु</u> च प्रवृत्ताव् अपि नैव शास्त्रम् अस्ति नियोगविधाव् इव व्यभिचारानुज्ञानस्मृत्यभावात्[^४९] । अथाप्रवृत्तौ कामयेत मारणम् इति प्रतिषेधभयात् प्रवर्तते सो ऽपि प्रतिषेधो रागलक्षणाम् एव हिंसां प्रतिषेधयति । न चासौ रागतो न प्रवर्तते ऽपि तु प्रतिषेधभयात् । या तु परोपकारतः प्रवृत्तिः सापि प्रतिषेधविषयपरिहारेण । यो ऽपि किंचिद् याचेद्[^५०] अयम् अहम् आत्मानं हन्मीति हन्यान् न तत्राप्रयच्छतो घातकत्वं व्यवहारोच्छेदप्रसङ्गात् ॥ ८.१०४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

There is the general prohibition.—‘one shall not speak a falsehood’; and
the present verse declares that this prohibition applies to cases other
than that entailing the death of the *Śūdra* and others; and it does not
actually enjoin the telling of falsehood. For if it meant the latter,
then any coordination between this and the said general prohibition
would he impossible.

“What is the condition meant to refer to what is asserted here? the
phrase *in that case* cannot be taken as indicating that *condition*; as
this phrase qualifies *death*; and as death is not existent at the time,
it could not be the required *condition*; for if it were, the meaning
would come to be that ‘when the death has been brought about, falsehood
should be spoken’; and this is not what is meant.”

The term ‘*where*’ referring to the *case*, the phrase ‘*in that case*’
also would refer to the same. Hence the meaning comes to be that—‘in a
case where the party defeated becomes liable to death’; and this
certainly can serve as the required condition.

As for the *king’s wrath*, this cannot he regarded as the required
*condition*; as it is an uncertain factor, and also because any penalty
inflicted entirely through wrath would be illegal.

For all these reasons the only right course is to take the text as
supplementary to the prohibition of lying.

In connection with Gautama’s test, there is no chance of its being taken
as an injunction of lying; for all that it says is—‘there is nothing
wrong in lying, if a man’s life is dependent upon it’ (13.24).

In the face of such prohibitions and sanctions, it depends on the will
of the man whether he shall tell the truth or untruth; so that arguing
in his mind that by telling the truth, he becomes the cause of the death
of the accused, and hence the transgressor of the law that ‘one shall
not kill any living being,’—the man decides to tell the untruth; and in
this he does what is quite reasonable.

*Question*. “All that the man does is to answer the question that is put
to him; he does not kill; and without killing, how can he be tainted
with the sin of *killing?*”

*Answer*. The man being free to say what he chooses, if, on account of
his deposition, the accused comes to be killed by the king, he does
become a *means* of thaṭ killing, and hence its *perpetrator or agent*.

*Question*. “Every kind of *means* does not become an *agent*, *e.g*.,
when nobility is acquired by wealth, or “fame by learning,” wealth and
learning are the *means* but not the *agents*. What makes a certain
thing the *means* is its capacity to bring about a special kind of
effect in the form of substance or quality. Even when an action is
spoken of as such an effect—*e.g*., in the assertion ‘cooking is done by
fire’—the action that is spoken of by the verbal noun (‘cooking’) is in
its *accomplished* form (and hence as good as a *substance* or a
*quality*; since an *action* is that which is still *in course of being
accomplished*). But the effect spoken of in the present context is of a
totally different kind—scriptural or spiritual, and not temporal,—being
brought about by what is declared in the scriptural texts; and the
*Agent* of such an act is not of the same character as that of the
former. If the character of the *Agent* were to consist in *command and
prayer*—which mean *ordering* and *requesting*,—then, in the case of
such assertions as ‘make the corns become hot,’ the use of the causal
form would he impossible, as it refers to the corns, which are *not
sentient* (and hence cannot have any *command* or *prayer* addressed to
them).”

All this has already been answered by the commentators, who have
explained that in such cases the action of the principal agent is
imposed upon (represented as belonging to) the subordinate (insentient)
agent. Such imposition upon insentient objects we find in such
expressions as—‘alms-begging affords shelter,’ ‘the dry cow-dung
teaches,’ and so forth. In such cases, the help accorded (in the shape
of *lodging* and *teaching*) is not by the insentient things (*begging*
and *cow-dung*), but by a different agent, who is the real *instigator*
of the acts. the act of teaching, for instance, is prompted by the
Injunction of having recourse to a Teacher; and when the teacher is
doing this act of teaching, he is hampered by cold and such other
hindrances; and this cold is removed by the dry cow-dung (being burnt as
fuel); thus it is that the action of ‘teaching’ itself comes to be
imposed upon the cow-dung. An ‘agent’ or an ‘instigator’ is so called
because of the *impelling* or urging done by it; and we do find such
*impelling* being done also by such insentient things as wind and water,
in reference to the burning of fire and floating of wood (respectively).
And in all such cases as there can be no *directing*, etc., done by the
Fire, the words would have to be regarded as used in a figurative sense.

If again the character of the ‘agent’ be hold to consist in doing
something conducive to the act in question,—then this could only he in
accordance with the actual action of the Agent concerned, which action
would be in the form of *preparing* for the main act; for one who
*arranges* for an act is said to *hate it done*; when for instance, for
a person who is going to dine, one man brings up the dish and another
serves the rice and so forth; similarly when a man is going to do the
act of killing, one man offers him the weapon, while another, by
recounting the misdeeds of the man going to ho killed, kindles the rage
of the person going to kill him. In all such cases, though each of these
other abettors does not do any directing or urging, yet, in as much as
he helps to bring about conditions favourable for the fulfilment of the
act concerned, becomes a sort of an ‘agent’ in it, in the sense that
what he actually does is conducive to the said act.

According to this view, the cow-dung and the Teacher would stand on the
same footing (as agents in the act of *teaching*).

But in this connection also that principal instigator is the ‘Agent’
without whom the act cannot be accomplished and who does not fall within
the category of any other particular case-relation. Without the readier,
the cow-dung itself cannot become a prompter of the teaching; while the
teacher can do the teaching, even without the cow-dung, and hence the
cow-dung becomes the subordinate factor. As for those things that are
definitely recognised as the ‘instrument,’ or such other factor
conducive to the accomplishment of an act,—these also would he clearly
subordinate. For instance, when one sees a man going to a remote village
again, even on slight business, he says ‘the horse *makes* Devadutta
*go*.’

*Question*.—“As a matter of fact, in connection with the nomenclature of
the case-relations, there is no reference made to the greater or less
intimacy of the determining relation; what difference then is there
between the cow-dung and the Teacher (so far as the character of the
nominative agent of the act of teaching is concerned)? The. distinction
that you have drawn between the two is a mere gratuitous assumption of
yours, and there is no reality behind it; while all Injunctions and
Prohibitions refer to realities. Further, it has also been declared that
‘the exact nature of case-relations is determined by the wish of the
speaker.’ Under the circumstances, if a certain speaker wishes to speak
of a nonagent as the agent, the Injunctions and Prohibitions relating to
the Agent could become applicable to him. For instance, when enunciating
the Sins, manu himself mentions ‘the buyer, the seller, the cooker and
the server’ (ns the *killer* of the animal whose flesh is eaten). From
this it is clear that the maxim that you have propounded is meant for
the purpose of lending support to the position taken up by yourself, and
it does not touch the reality of things.”

It is for this very reason that the commentators have agreed that if the
mere doing of something conducive to an act were the condition of being
the ‘agent,’ then every kind of cause (of the act) would have to be
regarded as ‘agent.’ So that when one gives food to a man, and this man,
being a glutton, happens to die by over-eating,—the man who gave the
food would become the agent in the act of killing. As a matter of fact,
however, the action of the feeder has not been prompted by the idea of
killing the man; it was prompted by the idea of a totally different act,
in the form of *feeding*, and not in that of *killing*; nor was it
prompted by hatred or jealousy or any such feeling. So that oven though
the man may have helped to bring about the death, yet he does not become
the ‘agent’ of that act. That is all that we have to say. In a case
where one takes away lands or gold, etc., belonging to another person,
and the latter dies through grief caused by the robbery,—it has to be
considered whether the robber becomes the ‘agent’ in the act of *robbing
only*, or in that of *killing* also.

“What is then to be ‘considered’ in this connection? The relation of
Cause and Effect can he ascertained by infallibility; and the robbing of
land or gold is not an *infallible* cause of death, to the same extent
as striking with the, sword or starving is.”

What sort of ‘infallibility’ is meant here? It may he held that if by a
certain thing, some one dies, while others do not,—then the agency or
causal efficiency of that thing (towards bringing about death) would be
regarded as ‘fallible.’ But any such principle would be defective, on
account of the divergence in the constitution of men. One and the same
medicine is found to be beneficial to a man of phlegmatic constitution,
but harmful to another. In fact in the case of all men, the appearance
of now forces is dependent upon such contingencies as those of
disposition, place, time, nature and accessories. In fact in the eases
cited also, the death is dependent upon the wealth and progeny of the
man concerned, as also upon thirst and other living organisms (?). For
instance, if the man robbed is of a very passionate disposition, or
liable to give way to grief, the trouble caused by the robbery becomes
conducive to death. And in such a case can the agency (of the robber in
the net of *killing*) he denied? On the other hand, if the man is
easy-natured, ho ignores the robbery. This same reasoning applies also
to the case of the man who, being obsessed by grief, commits suicide by
having recourse to starvation, falling from a precipice, taking
poison,—laying the blame of it upon other persons.

“But in such cases, in as much the taking of poison and other well-known
causes of death would be present, the wrong done in the shape of robbing
the land, etc., could not be regarded.os the cause of the death.”

But since the man has recourse to the means of death, by reason of being
stricken with grief, caused by the robbery,—the robbery becomes the
indirect cause of the death.

If such be the case, then if some one happens to be aggrieved by
wholesome advice given by a well-wisher and commit suicide, the person
offering the advice would be a ‘murderer.’ Similarly, jealous persons,
withering under the pangs of jealousy, would place the blame of their
suffering upon the wealthy person of whom they are jealous. Likewise,
when a man with unhinged mind dies upon the death of his son or his
loved person,—these latter would have to be regarded as ‘murderers.’ In
the same manner some light-hearted people, on seeing a beautiful woman,
become so affected that, becoming brokenhearted, they lose all
consciousness; and in this case chaste women would have to be censured.
And lastly (in the event of a Brāhmaṇa dying of grief caused by the
death of a loved person) the dead person would incur the sin of having
killed a Brāhmaṇa.

All this would be quite true, if there were no specific injunctions and
prohibitions covering special oases. As a matter of fact however, the
offering of wholesome advice is *enjoined*, while the robbing of what
belongs to another is *forbidden*. It has been thus declared—‘In the
case of people engaged in doing good to others, if there happen
something untoward, no blame attaches to those people; as for example,
in the case of physicians administering medicine.’ This does not mean
that it is only in the case of medicines administered by physicians
producing untoward results that there is no blame attaching to the
physicians,—but in all similar cases; *e.g*., when a cow has become
stuck in the mire, if a man exerts himself to the utmost in pulling her
out with his hand, and the cow happens to die, the man, who tried to
pull her out, is not open to blame. Similarly in all analogous cases.

If a man happens to carry on bis business carefully and acquires much
prosperity in the shape of riches,—if some people happen to burn with
jealousy, that man does not transgress any scriptural prohibition.
Further, an act becomes an object of prohibition only when its causal
efficiency (towards harm) is certain and unfailing; and no definite
deduction can be drawn regarding the momentarily changing mental
aberrations of. living beings; so that it cannot be definitely
ascertained that such and such a person has died on account of the
beauty of such and such a woman. And so long as we can get at
well-ascertained objects of prohibition, it cannot be right to make it
pertain to doubtful cases.

“But in a case where the fact of the man becoming pale and withered in
body, it is definitely ascertained that the cause of his suffering lies
in the beauty of a certain woman,—this woman should either renounce her
chastity and meet him, or else she should be regarded as a murderess.”

Certainly not; even though the causal efficiency (of the woman’s
chastity towards her lover’s sufferings) be duly ascertained, yet
chastity cannot become an object of prohibition; because such a
prohibition would be contrary to a definite Injunction; there is such an
Injunction regarding the avoidance of unchastity; and so long as an
Injunction has room for application in an objection not touched by any
other Injunction, it cannot encroach upon the objective of a contrary
Injunction (so that so long as the prohibition of killing has room for
application in the shape of ordinary murder, etc., it cannot encroach
upon the objective of the Injunction of chastity.)

Some people argue as follows:—“What the injunction of chastity prohibits
is that act which is done under the impulse of sexual passion, and not
that which is done under a righteous impulse sanctioned by the
scriptures. Hence, if the woman has intercourse with her dying lover,
solely for saving his life, being moved entirely by the consideration
that the poor man may lose his life,—she does not, by the act,
transgress the injunction of chastity as regards the dictum that one
injunction cannot encroach upon the objective of another; as the act in
question does not form the objective of any other injunction, being due
entirely to passion. It might he argued that there is no scriptural
injunction sanctioning the act (of the woman meeting the dying lover),
because there is no Smṛti text permitting adultery in such cases, as
there is one sanctioning the begetting of a child from the dead
husband’s younger brother. It is true that if she did not act so, she
would be encompassing the death of the man,—and it is on account of the
prohibition of the act of killing that she acts in that manner. But that
prohibition applies only to the *killing* that is done through the
passion of hatred; while when the woman desists from meeting the man, it
is not through hatred of him, but on account of the prohibition of
adultery. The act too that one may do for benefiting another person,
must be one that avoids the transgressing of all prohibitions.”

In a case where some one asks a man for a certain thing, and threatens
that he would kill himself if the thing is not given to him,—and does
actually kill himself,—the man who refused the request cannot be
regarded as a murderer. For if men were to be so regarded, there would
be an end to all worldly business.—(104)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 432), which says that
this is to be regarded as mere *arthavāda*, as expiatory rites are
prescribed for this lying also;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 207),
as an exception to the general rule regarding deposing truthfully;—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (38a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, p. 58a),
which explains that this verse makes *silence*, or even *lying*, better
than telling the truth, under the circumstances.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (13.24-25).—‘No guilt is incurred in giving false evidence in
case the life of a man depends thereon;—but not if the man involved be a
wicked one.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.35).—‘Men may speak an untruth in marriage, during
dalliance, when their lives are in danger, or the loss of their entire
property is imminent; and for the sake of a Brāhmaṇa; they declare that
an untruth spoken in these five cases does not make the speaker an
outcast.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.15).—‘Whenever the death of any member of the four castes is
involved, if witnesses give false evidence, they are not to blame.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.83).—‘When the death of a member of any caste is
involved the witness may speak an untruth.’

*Bṛhaspati* (7.34).—‘Let him preserve, even by telling a lie, a Brāhmaṇa
who has sinned once through error, and is in peril of life, and
oppressed by rogues and others.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सत्यवचनापवादो ऽयं कारणतः आदरार्थं वेदम् । शूद्रादीनां प्रातिलोम्येन ग्रहणम् अनृताभ्यनुज्ञानार्थम् । अ[नृतवचन]निवृत्त्यर्थात् तु युक्तावलम्बम् इदम् । एवं तर्हि सत्यप्रतिषेध एवात्र वक्तव्यः, नानृताभ्यनुज्ञेति । न त्व् एवमर्थानृताभ्यनुज्ञा कृतैव भवति । [न कदाचिद् वक्त]व्यतास्येति । ननु च पुरुषार्थकारित्वाच् छास्त्रस्य प्रत्यवायार्थ उपदेशो न न्याय्य इति । पुरुषार्थकारित्वाद् एवास्याय्म् उपदेशो युक्तः, [क्वचिद् अनृतवचनस्य] पुरुषानुग्रहधर्मापेक्षया च । तथा च सति धार्मिकपुरुषविषयम् इदम् अनृताभ्यनुज्ञानम् उपदेशसामर्थ्याद् विज्ञायते । तथा च स्मृत्यन्तरे "नानृतवचने दोषो जीवनं चेत् तद् अधीनम्, न तु पापीयसो जीवनम्" इति । अतश् च महाप्रत्यवायपरिहारार्थम् [एष] आश्रितो ऽनृतवचनव्यतिक्रमः । तस्य प्रायश्चित्तार्थम् इदम् आरभ्यते ॥ ८.१०५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

104	Whenever the death of a Sudra, of a Vaisya, of a Kshatriya, or of a Brahmana would be (caused) by a declaration of the truth, a falsehood may be spoken; for such (falsehood) is preferable to the truth.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/105_vAg-gaivatyaish_cha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>105 वाग्-गैवत्यैश् च ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वाग्-गैवत्यैश् च चरुभिर्  
यजेरंस् ते सरस्वतीम् ।  
अनृतस्यैनसस् तस्य  
कुर्वाणा निष्कृतिं पराम्  ॥ ८.१०५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/105_vAg-gaivatyaish_cha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

They should offer sacrifices to Sarasvati with half-boiled rice dedicated to the speech-goddess,—doing the best expiation for the sin of untruthfulness.—(105)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वाक् चासौ देवता च सा वाग्देवता । तदर्थं च चरवो **वाग्दैवत्याः** । तण्डुला नातिपक्वाश् **चरवः** । तैर् **यजेरन्न्** इति बहवचननिर्देशात्, **चरुभिर्** इति बहुवचनम् । न पुनर् एकैकशो बहवश् चरवो नापि संहतानां व्रात्यस्तोमवद् यागो "देवश् चेद् वर्षेद् बहवो ब्राह्मणा यजेरन्" (प्म्स् १०.६.४५) इति, तद् बहुवचनम् । न तु[^५१] कपिञ्जलैश् च त्रिभिर् यजेरन्न् इतिवत्[^५२] ।


[^५२]:
     M G DK (1: 275) omit: itivat


[^५१]:
     M G: nanu

- तद् एतद् ब्राह्मणाद्यनुग्रहार्थम् अनृतम् उक्तं भवति । **अनृतम् एवैनः** पापम् असत्याभिधानलक्षणा क्रिया । यथा धर्मक्रियावत एवं समानाधिकरणे षष्ठी । येषां तु क्रियाजन्यौ धर्माधर्मौ न क्रियैव, तन्मते ऽनृतस्य यद् एन इति वैय्यधिकरण्ये[^५३] ऽनृतनिमित्तत्वाद् एनो ऽनृतम्, उपचारतः समानाधिकरणे एव । तस्य **निष्कृतिः** शोधनं पावनं प्रायश्चित्तम् इति यावत् । **परा** प्रकृष्टा ।


[^५३]:
     DK: -karaṇyena

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च कुतो ऽत्र पापम्, यावतास्मिन् निमित्ते "नानृतवचने दोषः" (ग्ध् १३.२४) इत्य् उक्तम् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;केचिद् आहुः "निवृत्तिस् तु महाफला" (म्ध् ५.५६) इति । अस्माच् छास्त्रात् तु यावज्जीवम् अनृतं मया न वक्तव्यम् इति येन संकल्पितं तस्य मिथ्यासंकल्पदोषो मा भूद् इति प्रायश्चित्तम् उच्यते । गेहदाहवधप्रतिषेधे[^५४] ऽपि नैमित्तिकं विधानम् । **एनसो निष्कृतिम्**[^५५] इत्य् अर्थवादः । 


[^५५]:
     DK: niṣkṛtir


[^५४]:
     M G DK: -vadhāpratiṣedhe

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कथं तर्हि[^५६] **वाग्दैवत्यैः सरस्वतीम् यजेरन्** । यदि वाग्देवता[^५७] सरस्वती कथम् इज्यते[^५८] । अथ वाक्सरस्वत्योर् एकत्वेनैवं देवताभावे शब्दावगम्यरूपत्वाद् देवताया भिन्नौ चेतौ वाक्सरस्वतीशब्दौ । यथाग्नये जुहोतीति चोदितेन ज्वलनाय कृशानवे वा स्वाहेति हूयते, वायवे निरूप्य जुहुयाद् वायुर् वै प्राण इत्य् उक्ते ऽपि न प्राणायेति हूयते ।


[^५८]:
     M G: iṣyate


[^५७]:
     M G: vāgdevatyāḥ


[^५६]:
     M G: idaṃ tarhi; DK idaṃ tarhi kathaṃ; I follow J.

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;सत्यम् । वाग् एव देवता । सामानाधिकर्ण्याद् देवतार्थे तद्धितः ।[^५९] सरस्वतीम् इति[^६०] द्वितीयान्निर्देशात् । न हि[^६१] द्वितीयानिर्देश्या देवता । कर्मणि हि द्वितीया संप्रदानं च देवता, न कर्म । 


[^६१]:
     J omit: dvitīyānnirdeśāt | na hi


[^६०]:
     M G omit: iti


[^५९]:
     J adds: na

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कथं तर्हि सरस्वतीपदान्वयः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अर्थवादो ऽयम् । अग्नये जुहोत्य् अग्निर् वै सर्वा देवता इति । वाग् एव सरस्वती । तयेष्टया सापीष्टा भवति । यागेन देवतावगम्यते । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कथम् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अग्निर् यष्टव्यः प्रजापतिर् यष्टव्यस् तथाग्निं यजति यद् अग्निं यजतीत्यादि केचिद् आहुः । देवताः[^६२] स्वतस्[^६३] तत्र तत्र पूज्यन्ते । दैवतपूजावचनो ऽत्र यजिः । पूजा च पूज्यमानकर्मिका । तत्र युक्ता द्वितीया । तथा च देवता पूजनीयेत्यादि स्मर्यते । 


[^६३]:
     DK: devatās tu


[^६२]:
     M G: daivataiḥ

<u>एतच्</u> च न युक्तम् । अस्मिन् हि पक्षे देवतात्वम् अन्यतो मृग्यम् । तत्र[^६४] यागसंप्रदानं देवतेति स्मरणविरोधः । एषा च स्मृतिर् बलीयसी, निरपेक्षत्वात् । पूर्वा देवता उद्देश्या[^६५] ध्येया च । यस्यै देवतायै हविर् गृहीतं स्यात् तां मनसा ध्यायेद् इति तत्क्रियाकर्मत्वात् कर्मण्य् एषा द्वितीया ॥ ८.१०५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Speech-goddess*’—goddess in the form of speech; the rice boiled for
her is said to be ‘*dedicated* to the speech-goddess’;—Rice not
over-boiled is called ‘*chant*’;—with these they should offer
sacrifices.

We have ‘*carubhiḥ*,’ ‘with half-boiled rice,’ in the plural number, on
account of the plural number in the verb ‘*yajerau*’, ‘*they should
sacrifice*’; and it does not mean that each man shall offer several
kinds of rice. Nor is this offering to be made by several persons
collectively, as is done in the case of the *Vrātyastoma* offering. The
plural number in the present case is exactly analogous to the plural
number in such passages as—‘If it rains, many Brāhmaṇas should offer
*sacrifices*’; and it is not like that in the case of the ‘*kapiñjala
birds*’ (where *at least three* are meant).

In the case in question the lie is told for the sake of helping the
Brāhmaṇa or some such person; and this lying itself is a ‘*sin*’;—the
action of lying itself being a sin. The genitive ending in the phrase
‘*anṛtasyainaḥ*’ ‘sin of lying’ denotes apposition; just as in the
phrase ‘*Dharmakriyā*’ (where ‘*dharma*’ and ‘*kriyā*’ are in
apposition). Some people however hold that ‘virtue’ and ‘vice’ or
‘merit’ and ‘sin’ are *produced by actions* (and do not consist in the
actions themselves); and according to this view in the phrase ‘*anṛtasya
enaḥ*,’ ‘*sin of lying*,’ the terms ‘sin’ of ‘lying’ would not be in
apposition; the ‘sin’ being the *effect* of the lying, and hence
figuratively spoken of as being in apposition with it.

The ‘*niṣkṛti*’ of this sin is ‘purifying,’ ‘cleaning,’—*i.e*.,
expiation.

‘*Best*’—most excellent.

“Why should there be any sin in this case—when it has been declared that
there is nothing wrong in lying under the circumstances mentioned.”

Some people answer this objection by pointing out that the avoiding of
untruth leads to excellent results (even when the telling of untruth may
be permissible): a man may, on the basis of the scriptures, have taken
the vow that throughout his life he would not tell a lie; and if such a
man were to tell a lie for saving the life of a man, he would incur the
sin of having boon false to his vow; and it is in view of this sin that
the present text prescribes the expiation. Even though such acts as the
burning of a house and killing are prohibited, yet they have been
sanctioned under special conditions. Similarly we have (in the preceding
verse) the sanction for lying under special circumstances; hence the
mention of its ‘expiation’ must be regarded as a mere reference (to the
prohibition of lying in general).

*Question*.—“How can a sacrifice be offered to *Sarasvatī* with what has
been *dedicated to the goddess of speech?*” If the rice has been
‘dedicated’ to the Speech-goddess, how can the sacrifice be regarded as
offered to *Sarasvatī*? Or, if the two *Sarasvatīs* (one spoken of by
the name ‘*Sarasvati*, ‘while the other is referred to by the name
‘*speech-goddess*’) combined be regarded as the deity to whom the
sacrifice is offered,—then there arises this difficulty that, as a
matter of fact, the exact nature of the deity of a sacrifice can be
learnt entirely from *words*, and the two names here used are two
distinct words (so that both could not refer to the same deity); for
instance, if the injunction of an offering is in the form—‘the offering
should be made *to Agni*,’—people do not use the other names of
Agni,—such as ‘*Jvalana*’ ‘*Kṛśānu*’ and the like—when actually making
the sacrifice. Similarly when the injunction is in the form ‘one should
offer to *Vāyu*,’—even though it is distinctly laid down that ‘*Vaya* is
*Prāṇa*’—the name ‘*Prāṇa*’—is not used when the offering is actually
made.”

All this is quite true; ‘*speech-goddess*’ is the deity of the
sacrifice,—the nominal affix in the term ‘*vāgdaivatya*’ being
denotative of the deific character; and the deity is not denoted by the
term ‘*Sarasvatīm*,’ which appears with the accusative ending. Because
the Accusative ending denotes the *objective*, while the deity is the
*recipient*, and not the *objective*.

“How then is the term ‘*Sarasvatīm*’ to be construed?”

The present passage is only a hortatory exaggeration, just like the
assertion ‘one should make au offering to Agni, *Agni is all deities*;’
and what the present statement means is that ‘speech-goddess is
Sarasvatī herself, and hence when the offering is made to the former she
is pleased, and it reaches the other also.’

The character of the ‘deity’ is ascertained only through sacrifices; as
in the case of sacrifices offered to Agni, to Prajāpati and so forth
(where the fact of Agni or Prajāpati being the deity is ascertained only
by the sacrifice being offered to them).

Some people explain that what is meant is that the deities are to be
*worshipped*, the root ‘*yaji*’ (in ‘*yajeran*’) signifying the act of
*worshipping*; and the deity worshipped forms the *objective* of the
‘worship’; so that the use of the Accusative in ‘*Sarasvatīm*’ is only
right and proper. There are several such assertions as ‘*he worships the
deity*’ (where the deity is the object of the verb *to worship*).”

This however is not right. As under this view the *deific* character of
*Sarasvatī* will have to be deduced from somewhere else; and such an
interpretation would be contrary to the dictum that ‘the deific
character consists in being the *recipient* of a sacrificial offering.’
This dictum however, being self-sufficient, is highly authoritative.

The real explanation is that the deity to whom a sacrifice is offered is
to be made the recipient of the offering, and also to be meditated
upon,—according to the injunction, ‘One shall think in his mind of the
deity for whom the offering is held up’; so that the deity is also the
object of the act of *meditating*; and the accusative ending (in
‘*Sarasvatīm*’) actually denotes the *objective* itself.—(105)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kapiñjalaiḥ*’ (Medhātithi, p. 937, l. 11)—This refers to a case dealt
with in Mīmāṃsā-sūtra, where it is said that whenever the plural number
is used, we should understand it to mean *three*; for instance, when
‘Kapiñjala birds’ are spoken of as to be sacrificed. Medhātithi says
that this principle should not be applied to the present case of the
plural in ‘*Charrubhiḥ*’.

Nandana does not read the verse differently as asserted by Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 682), which adds that the plural
number in ‘*Carubhiḥ*’ is due to the plurality of the persons referred
to here—‘*te*’, ‘*they*’;—in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 432), which says
that this refers to the three higher castes only.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 390);—in
*Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 355), which adds that ‘*Vāgdevatā*’ here must be
taken as standing for *Sarasvatī*, the terms ‘*Vāk*’ and ‘*Sarasvatī*’
being synonymous, specially as it is only thus that the offering shall
be consistent with its name ‘*Sacrifice to Sarasvatī*’; it proceeds to
add that the pronoun ‘*te*’ here stands for those witnesses who tell a
lie for saving a Brāhmaṇa or a Kṣatriya from death;—in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Vyavahāra, p. 207); and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (38b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.105-106)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.83).—‘For expiating the sin involved in deposing
falsely for saving the life of a man, twice-born persons should offer
the cooked rice dedicated to Sarasvatī.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.16-17).—‘In order to expiate the sin committed (by deposing
falsely for saving the life of a man), the witness, if he is a
twice-born person, must pour an oblation into the fire, consecrating it
with the Mantra-texts called *Kūṣmāṇḍī*; if he is a Śūdra, he must feed
ten cows for one day.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.19.16).—‘Let him who has given false evidence (for any
reason) drink hot milk during twelve days and nights, and pour oblations
into the fire with the mantras called *Kūṣmāṇḍī*.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सरस्वतीं यजेरन्न् "अहं रुद्रेभिर् वसुभिश् चरामि" इत्य् अनेनाष्टर्चेन सूक्तेन । त्रिर् अभ्यासश् चरोः । अनाश्रितबहुत्वविशेषाच् चोदनाया, यथा "वसन्ताय कपिञ्जलान् आलभते" इति ॥ ८.१०६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

105	Such (witnesses) must offer to Sarasvati oblations of boiled rice (karu) which are sacred to the goddess of speech, (thus) performing the best penance in order to expiate the guilt of that falsehood.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/106_kUShmANDair_vApi.md">
<details open><summary><h3>106 कूष्माण्डैर् वापि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

कूष्माण्डैर् वापि जुहुयाद्  
घृतम् अग्नौ यथाविधि [त१०।-५; व्स्२०।१४] ।  
उद् इत्य् ऋचा वा वारुण्या  
तृचेनाऽब्-दैवतेन वा [र्स्।२४।१५; १०।।-३; व्स्१२।;व्स्१२।५०]  ॥ ८.१०६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/106_kUShmANDair_vApi.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Or he shall offer according to rule, clarified butter into the fire, with the ‘kuṣmāṇḍa’-texts or with the verse ‘ut, etc.’ sacred to varuṇa, or with the three verses sacred to the waters.—(106)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**कूमाण्डा** नाम मन्त्रा यजुर्वेदे पठ्यन्ते । तैर् **घृतम् अग्नौ जुहुयात्** । जुहोतिश् च देवताम् उद्दिश्य द्रव्यस्य त्यागः । आघारविशेषणे तत्रेहाग्नाव् इत्य् अधिकरणनिर्देशान् मन्त्रवर्णिकी देवता वेदितव्या । येषु च मन्त्रेषु देवताविशेषलिङ्गं न दृश्यते — यथा "देवकृतस्यैनसो ऽवयजनम् असि" (व्स् ८.१३) इत्यादिषु — तत्र प्रजापतिर् देवतेति याज्ञिकाः । अथ वा यस्यान्यत्र देवतात्वं दृष्टं सेह संबन्धीति[^६६] यावत् । तथा च निरुक्तकाराः- "अपि वा सा कामदेवता स्यात्" (निर् ७.४.५) इति । यद्य् अपि यान्यस्य हविषो देवता सान्यस्य न कदाचित् तथापि यजति श्रूयते द्रव्यं मन्त्राश् च ते ऽत्रासत्यां देवतायां[^६७] जुहोतीति रूपं[^६८] तद् उत्तरेण जुहुयाद् इति व्याख्येयम् । तच् चायुक्तम् । तथाभिक्षारयेद् इति वक्तव्यं स्यात् । वयं तु ब्रूमः- "देवकृतस्यैनसो ऽवयजनम् असि" इत्य् अत्र कर्मैवावयजनम् एवावयाजनम् इत्य् उच्यते । अतस् तद् देवता[^६९] । सर्वत्र च मन्त्राभिधेयं वस्त्व् अस्त्व् इति न देवतायां मन्त्रवर्णाभावः ।


[^६९]:
     DK: tad eva devatā


[^६८]:
     DK (1:276): juhuteḥ rūpaṃ, and omits: tad uttareṇa


[^६७]:
     M G: daivatāyāṃ


[^६६]:
     M G J: saha saṃbandhi

**उद् इत्य् ऋचा वा वारुण्येति** । "उद् उत्तमं वरुणपाशम् अस्मत्" (र्व् १.२४.१५) इति एषा ऋक् वरुणदेवता[^७०] **उद्** इति प्रतीकेन तल् लक्ष्यते । वारुणीग्रहणं चान्यस्या "उ त्वा मदन्तु स्तोमा" (र्व् ८.६४.१) इत्य् उच्छब्दप्रतीकाया निवृत्त्यर्थम्[^७१] । **तृचेनाब्दैवतेन चेति**[^७२] । तद् एव[^७३] देवतैव दैवतम्, आपो दैवतम् अस्य त्र्यृचस्य तेन "आपो हि ष्टा" (र्व् १०.९.१) इत्यादिना । अतश् चैकैकया[^७४] एकैकाहुतिः प्रत्येकशब्दवत्,[^७५] समस्तेन च[^७६] समुदायाहुतिर् एकेति ।   

**घृतम् अग्नाव्** इति सर्वत्रानुषङ्गः । **यथाविधि** । यादृशः शिष्टसमाचार इत्य् अर्थः । तेन च हविषः सत्त्वाद्[^७७] अप्राप्तायाम् इतिकर्तव्यतायां परिसमूहनपर्युक्षणावेक्षणस्रुवहोमाद्येतावन्मात्रम् अनुजानाति । **वा**शब्दाद् वैकल्पिकाः सर्व एव ॥ ८.१०६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The mantras called ‘*kūṣmāṇḍā*’ are found in the *Yajurveda*; with these
he shall offer clarified butter into the fire. The root ‘*hu*’ (in
‘*juhuyāt*’) signifies the act of *giving away to a certain deity*; and
as the term ‘*agnau*’ mentions *Agni* only as the receptacle into which
the offering is to be poured, the deity of the offering should be
deduced from the words of these Mantras themselves. In those cases where
the words of the mantras are not found to be indicative of any
deity,—*e.g*., in the *mantra* ‘*devakṛtasyainasovayanamasi*, *etc*.’
(Yājurvedā, 8.13) *Prajāpati* is to be accepted as the required
deity,—so say the people learned in sacrificial lore. The other
alternative view is that the offering in such cases is to be associated
with those that have already been found to be the ‘deity’ of other
offerings. The author of the *Nirukta* also has declared—‘what others
could be the deity?’ Though there is no deity common to all offerings in
general, each sacrifice has its own materials as well as deity clearly
indicated, sometimes directly, sometimes indirectly through *mantras*.

What we say however is that the *mantra*
‘*devakṛtasyainasovayajanamasi*,’ itself contains the term ‘*yajana*’;
and as ‘*yajana*’ is the same as ‘*yājana*,’ it is the latter that is
the required deity; and as in the case of every *mantra*, there is hound
to be something that is denoted by it, there will always be some words
of the *mantra* that would indicate the required deity.

The verse ‘*ut, etc*.,’ refers to the verse ‘*Uduttamam varuṇa
pāśamasmat*, *etc*.’ (Ṛgveda, 1.24.15); and the epithet ‘*sacred to
Varuṇa*’ has been added in order to exclude the other verse beginning
with ‘*ut*’,—*vis*., “*Ut-tvā madantu stomā*,’ etc. (Ṛgveda, 8.64.1).

‘*With the three verses sacred to the waters*.’—The term ‘*daivata*’ is
synonymous with ‘*devatā*’; and the three verses of which the Waters are
the deity are ‘*Āpohiṣṭhā mayobhuvaḥ, etc*’ (Ṛgveda, 10.9.1). In this
case there is one oblation with each of these three verses and one with
all the three collectively.

The terms ‘*clarified butter*’ and ‘*into the fire*’ have to be
construed with every clause.

‘*According to rule*,’—*i.e*., in accordance with the practice of
cultured people. Hence, in as much as the offering being that of butter,
all the details of the primary sacrifices could not be transferred to
it,—this phrase sanctions the adopting of only such details as the
brushing of the place, sprinkling it with water, examining of the
butter, pouring the oblations with the *sruva* and so forth.

The particle ‘*vā*’ shows that all the offerings mentioned are to be
regarded as optional alternatives.—(106)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Kūṣmaṇḍaiḥ*’—*i.e* ., Vājasaneya Saṃhitā, 20.14-16, or *Taittirīya
Āraṇyaka*, 10.3-5.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 682), which adds that ‘*uditi*’
refers to the opening word of the mantra ‘*Uduttamamvaruṇa pāśamasmat*
&c.’ (Ṛgveda, 1.24.15);—in Parāśaramādhava (Prāyaścitta, p. 390);—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 207);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (38b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.105-106)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.105].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अग्निग्रहणं जुहोतिसिद्धम् अप्य् अग्निविशेषार्थं विज्ञेयम् । इदं च पूर्वप्रायश्चित्तवैकल्पिकम् । उत्तरे च —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

106	Or such (a witness) may offer according to the rule, clarified butter in the fire, reciting the Kushmanda texts, or the Rik, sacred to Varuna, 'Untie, O Varuna, the uppermost fetter,' or the three verses addressed to the Waters.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/107_tripaxAd_abruvan.md">
<details open><summary><h3>107 त्रिपक्षाद् अब्रुवन् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

त्रिपक्षाद् अब्रुवन् साक्ष्यम्  
ऋणादिषु नरो ऽगदः ।  
तदृणं प्राप्नुयात् सर्वं  
दशबन्धं च सर्वतः  ॥ ८.१०७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/107_tripaxAd_abruvan.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The man, who, without being ill, does not give evidence for three fortnights, in regard to debts and other matters, should hear that entire debt, as also a penalty of the tenth part in all cases.—(107)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पञ्चदशाहोरात्राणि **पक्षः** । त्रयाणां पक्षाणां समाहारः **त्रिपक्षम्** । "अकारान्तोत्तरपदो द्विगुः" (पत् इ- ४८०) इति स्त्रीत्वे प्राप्ते पात्रादिदर्शनात्[^७८] प्रतिषेधः । यद्य् एवं त्रिपक्षीति न प्राप्नोति । छान्दसस् तत्र लिङ्गव्यत्ययः । ल्यब्लोपे कर्मणि पञ्चमी । त्रीन् पक्षान् यावद् अतीय यः साक्ष्यं न ददाति । **अगदो** ऽपीडितशरीरस् **तद् ऋणं**[^७९]** प्राप्नुयाद्** इत्य् अर्थः । **दशबन्धं** **च** । दशमं भागं दण्डनीयस् तस्माद् ऋणात् । **ऋणादिषु** इत्यादिग्रहणेन सर्वव्यवहारोपक्रमः । द्वितीयम् ऋणग्रहणम् उपलक्षणार्थम् । यस्मिन् व्यवहारे साक्ष्यम् इयन्तं कालं न[^८०] भवति पराजीयमानस्य[^८१] साक्षिणो बोढार[^८२] इत्य् उक्तं भवति । **गदो** रोगस् तत्समानप्रत्युत्थानहेतूपलक्षणार्थम् । तेनात्र कुटुम्बोपद्रवधनिकोपरोधाद्य् अपि परीक्ष्यम् । **बन्ध**शब्दः संख्यादिपरो दण्डविषये दशमाषवचनः । **नर**ग्रहणं **सर्वतो**ग्रहणं च श्लोकपूरणार्थम् । 


[^८२]:
     M G DK: bāḍham; I do not understand the meaning of boḍhāra accepted by Jha.


[^८१]:
     M G DK add: bādhaḥ sa


[^८०]:
     M G DK omit: na


[^७९]:
     M G: tatsadṛśaṃ


[^७८]:
     See Pat I: 480.12: pātrādibhyaḥ pratiṣedho vaktavyaḥ. 

<u>अन्ये त्व्</u> आहुस् **तद् ऋणं प्राप्नुयाद्** इत्य् अस्यायम् अर्थः । ऋणापहरणलक्षणेन[^८३] पापेन युज्येत । राज्ञे वा जीयमानस्य यो दण्डस् ततो दशमम् अंशं दद्याद् इति दण्डितः पुनः दण्ड्यते[^८४] ॥ ८.१०७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Fifteen days and nights make a ‘*fortnight*’; the aggregate of three
fortnights is called ‘*tripakṣam*’; according to Pāṇini 2.4.17, the
compound should have a feminine ending, but this is precluded by the
exception that follows, regarding ‘*pātra*’ and other words (which
include the word ‘*pakṣa*’ also).

“In that case the feminine form ‘*tripakṣī*’ should be impossible.”

The wrong gender in that case is to be regarded as a ‘Vedic anomaly.’

The Ablative ending in ‘*tripakṣāt*’ has the force of the participial
affix ‘*lyap*.’

The meaning of the verse thus is that—‘He who after *having waited for*
three fortnights, dees not give evidence, without being ill, should hear
the burden of that debt’;—‘as also the tenth part out of it, as a
penalty.’

‘*Debts and other mailers*’;—the addition of the phrase ‘and other
matters’ indicates that what is said here applies to all kinds of suits;
and the repetition of the term ‘debt’ is only by way of illustration.
The meaning is that—‘in a suit where for the said time no evidence is
given, the burden of the defeated party is to be borne by the
witnesses.’

‘*Gada*,’ ‘*illness*,’ is meant to indicate other kinds of disability
also; so that due cognizance should be taken of such conditions also as
family troubles, fear of creditor and so forth.

The term ‘*bandha*’ following a numeral word, denotes *penalty*, and
stands for the ‘tenth part.’

The terms ‘*naraḥ*’ and ‘*sarvataḥ*’ are added only for filling up the
metre.

Others explain that the assertion ‘*should hear that debt*’ means that
‘he incurs the sin of stealing the amount of the debt.’

The meaning is that the man shall pay the tenth part of the fine that
would be payable to the king by the defeated party.—(107)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Hopkins again misrepresents Nandana as reading ‘*gatonaraḥ*’ for
‘*Narogadaḥ*.’ It is clear that Hopkins had a very defective manuscript
of Nandana’s commentary.

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (37b);—in *Aparārka* (p. 677),
to the effect that it is only in cases relating to debts and the like
that the absentee witness who is fit to attend, does not attend;—in
*Mitākṣarā* (on 2.76) which adds that ‘*agadaḥ*’ stands for freedom from
disease and state or divine oppression;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra,
p. 213), which explains ‘*agadaḥ*’ as ‘in good health,’—‘*tadṛnam*’ as
that which can be proved by means of witnesses;—‘*sarvam*’ as ‘along
with accrued interest,’ and ‘*prāpnuyāt*’ as ‘should be paid’;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 54b) which explains that ‘*agadaḥ*’ stands
for the ‘absence of obstacles arising either from natural causes or from
some action of the king.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (13.6).—‘If witnesses, on being asked, do not answer, they are
guilty of a crime.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.76).—‘A person not deposing as a witness should be made
to pay, on the forty-sixth day, the entire amount of the debt (involved
in the suit), along with the tenth part of that amount as penalty.’

*Bṛhaspati* (7.31).—‘If a witness, who is not ill, being summoned, does
not make his appearance, he should be made to pay the debt and also a
fine, after the lapse of three fortnights.’

*Nārada* (1.197).—‘He who conceals his knowledge at the time of trial,
although previously he has stated to others what he knows, deserves
specially heavy punishment; for he is more criminal than a false
witness.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.387).—‘The man who, when summoned, does not bear
witness is punishable.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यावतो द्रव्यस्याभियोगः तद्दशभागः साक्षिणं दापयेत् । येनारोगः सन् त्रिपक्षाद् अपि साक्षी नान्यतरं ब्रवीति । दण्डयित्वापि तं साक्षिणं व्यवहारदर्शनम् अनुतिष्ठेत्, एवम् अपरिसमाप्तत्वाद् अस्येत् । ऋणव्यवहाराद् अन्यत्र साक्षी कार्यद्रव्यापेक्षया दण्डयितव्यः ॥ ८.१०८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

107	A man who, without being ill, does not give evidence in (cases of) loans and the like within three fortnights (after the summons), shall become responsible for the whole debt and (pay) a tenth part of the whole (as a fine to the king).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/108_yasya_dRshyeta.md">
<details open><summary><h3>108 यस्य दृश्येत ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यस्य दृश्येत सप्ताहाद्  
उक्त-वाक्यस्य साक्षिणः ।  
रोगो ऽग्निर् ज्ञातिमरणम्  
ऋणं दाप्यो दमं च सः  ॥ ८.१०८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/108_yasya_dRshyeta.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

That witness,—who may be found, within a week of having given evidence, to suffer from sickness, fire or the death of a relative,—should be made to pay the debt and also the penalty.—(108)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सप्ताहाद्** इति पञ्चमीदर्शनाद् अर्वाग् इत्य् अध्याह्रियते । सप्तानां दिवसानाम् अन्यतमस्मिन्न् अहनि **यस्य** **साक्षिणो** **रोगा**दि दृश्यते स मृषावादी दैवेन विभावितः पूर्वोक्तेन विधिना दापयितव्यः । **रोगो** ऽत्यन्तपीडाकरः, **अग्निर्** गोवाहनदहनः, पुत्रदारादिप्रत्यासन्न**ज्ञातिमरणम्,** तस्य कूटसाक्षित्वे लिङ्गम् ॥ ८.१०८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Saptāhāt*,’ ‘*within a week*,’—the use of the Ablative implies that
the proposition ‘before’ is understood. That is, on anyone of the seven
days, after he has given evidence, if the witness is found to suffer
from sickness, it implies that he has been adjudged by destiny to be a
perjuror, and hence he should be punished in accordance with the
aforesaid rule.

‘*Illness*’ stands for any kind of acute suffering;—‘*fire*’ for the
burning of cattle and conveyances;—and ‘*death of a relative*’ for the
death of the son or the wife or some other near relative;—all these
being indicative of his having given false evidence.—(108)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Nandana is again misrepresented by Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.80.)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.113).—‘If a man suffers no calamity, arising either
from the King or from some supernatural force, within fourteen days (of
his deposition), he should undoubtedly be regarded as pure (honest).’

*Nārada* (Aparārka, p. 715).—‘If the man suffers some calamity after the
lapse of two weeks, he shall not be accused on that account (of
dishonesty).’

*Viṣṇu* (14.4-5).—‘He to whom any calamity happens within a fortnight or
three weeks—such as an illness, or fine, or death of a relative, or a
heavy visitation by the King,—should be known to be
dishonest,—otherwise, he should be known as honest.’

*Pitāmaha* (Aparārka, p. 715).—‘If within three days, or seven days, or
two weeks, some calamity befalls the man, he should be regarded as a
sinner. If he alone, and none other, should suffer from illness, or
death of a relative, or fine, this would be an indication of his sin.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अर्वाक् सप्ताहात् साक्षी कुटुम्बरोगादिदर्शनेन मिथ्यावचनस् साक्षाद् एव प्रतिपादितो दण्डयितव्यः । यावन्तं तदनृतेन दापितो वा दण्डितश् च । ऋणव्यवहारार्थं त्व् अन्यत्र शास्त्रसामर्थ्यापेक्षया । एवम् उभयं मिथ्यावचनेषु साक्षिषु प्रकल्प्यम् । असाक्षिकेषु तावद् व्यवहारेष्व् एवम् अन्मानसाक्षिनिमित्तो निर्णयः ॥ ८.१०९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

108	The witness to whom, within seven days after he has given evidence, happens (a misfortune through) sickness, a fire, or the death of a relative, shall be made to pay the debt and a fine.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/109_asAxikeShu_tv.md">
<details open><summary><h3>109 असाक्षिकेषु त्व् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

असाक्षिकेषु त्व् अर्थेषु  
मिथो विवादमानयोः ।  
अविन्दंस् तत्त्वतः सत्यं  
शपथेनाऽपि लम्भयेत्  ॥ ८.१०९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/109_asAxikeShu_tv.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In witness-less cases, if he cannot get at the truth between the two disputants by any means, he should discover it by means of oath.—(109)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अविद्यमानाः साक्षिणो येष्व् **अर्थेषु** व्यवहारेषु ते **ऽसाक्षिकाः** । तेषु **सत्यम्** अजानानो राजा **तत्त्वतो** लौकिकेनानुमानेनापीत्य् अर्थः । तत्र **शपथेनापि** वक्ष्यमाणेन दैवेनानुमानेन **लम्भयेत्** जानीयात् । लभिः प्राप्तिवचनो ऽपि सामर्थ्याज् जानात्यर्थः । न ह्य् अन्यः सत्यस्य लाभः । "न विन्दन्" इति पाठे ऽप्य् एवम् एव व्याख्येयम् । "असाक्षिकेषु शपथेन लम्भयेत्" इत्य् एतावद् विध्युद्देशवाक्यावसानात् श्लोकपूरणार्थम् । **मिथः **परस्परम्[^८५] ॥ ८.१०९ ॥


[^८५]:
     M G DK omit: na hy anyaḥ . . . mithaḥ** **parasparam |
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Witnessless cases*,’—those cases in which there are no witnesses;—in
regard to these, when the king fails to find out the truth,—*by any
means*,—*i.e*, by any ordinary methods,—‘*he shall discover*’—learn—it
‘*by means of oath*’—*i.e*, by transcendental methods of inference. The
root ‘*labh*’ ‘to get at’ (in ‘*lambhayet*’), though literally meaning
the *attaining* of a thing, indirectly implies *knowing*.

All that the advice conveyed by the injunction means is that ‘in cases
where there are no witnesses, he shall discover the truth by means of
oath’; all the rest merely fills up the metre.

‘*Mithaḥ*’—between themselves.—(109)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Śapathena*’—‘Supernatural proof’ (Medhātithi);—‘oath’—‘touching of the
head and so forth’ (Nārāyaṇa),—or declaring ‘may heinous sins accrue to
me if what I have said turns out to be untrue’ (Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 694), which adds that
‘*asākṣikeṣu*’ means ‘in cases where no human evidence is
available’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 71b), which explains
‘*asākṣikeṣu*’ in the same manner.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (13.12-13).—‘Some declare that the witnesses shall be charged
with oath to speak the truth. In the case of others than Brāhmaṇas that
oath shall be sworn in the presence of Gods, of Brāhmaṇas and of the
King.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.19).—‘Let the Judge summon the witnesses, at the time of
sunrise, and examine them, after having bound them by an oath.’

*Viṣṇu* (9.33).—‘Let the Judge summon the defendant at the time of
sunrise, after having fasted on the previous day and bathed in his
clothes, and make him go through all the ordeals in the presence of Gods
and of Brāhmaṇas.’

*Nārada* (1.235, 236, 239).—‘When owing to the negligence of the
creditor, both documentary evidence and witnesses are missing,—and the
defendant denies his obligation, three different methods may be
adopted:—Timely reminder, Argument, and thirdly, Oath; these are the
measures that the plaintiff should adopt against his adversary. If
arguments are of no avail, let him cause the defendant to undergo one of
the ordeals.’

*Nārada* (1.247-249).—‘If no witness is forthcoming, for either of the
two litigant parties, he must test them through ordeals and oaths of
every sort. When a heavy crime has been committed, the King shall
administer one of the ordeals: in light cases, the virtuous king shall
swear the man with oaths.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.97).—‘Calling him at sun-rise, after he has fasted and
bathed with clothes on, he shall make him go through the ordeals, in the
presence of Gods, Brāhmaṇas and the King.’

*Bṛhaspati* (10.1-3).—‘A forger of gems, pearl or coral, one withholding
a deposit, a ruffian and an adulterer shall, in every case, be tested by
oaths and ordeals. In charges related to heavy crimes, or to the
appropriation of a deposit, the King should try the case by ordeals,
even though there be witnesses. When a thing has happened long ago, or
in secret, or when the witnesses have disappeared, or are perjured all
of them,—the trial should be conducted by having recourse to an ordeal.’

*Śukranīti* (4-5.460).—‘When argument also fails, ordeal has to be used
in the investigation of cases.’

Do. (4-5.525).—‘If one party urges *human* evidence, and the other
*divine*, the King should accept the former, not the latter.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5, 529).—‘The six kinds of decision are—through evidence,
argument, custom, oaths, king’s edict and confession by the defendant.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सत्यप्रशंसार्थं पुराकल्पार्थवाद उदाह्रियते विहितानुष्ठानप्ररोचनाय ॥ ८.११० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

109	If two (parties) dispute about matters for which no witnesses are available, and the (judge) is unable to really ascertain the truth, he may cause it to be discovered even by an oath.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/110_maharShibhish_cha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>110 महर्षिभिश् च ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

महर्षिभिश् च देवैश् च  
कार्यार्थं शपथाः कृताः ।  
वसिष्ठश् चाऽपि शपथं  
शेपे पैजवने नृपे  ॥ ८.११० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/110_maharShibhish_cha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

By the great sages, as well as by the Gods, oaths have been taken for the purposes of a case; Vasiṣṭha even swore an oath before the King Paijavana.—(110)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अर्थवादो ऽयं पूर्वोक्तस्य शपथविधेः । **महर्षिभिः** सप्तर्षिप्रभृतिभिः **कार्यार्थं** संदिग्धकार्यनिर्णयार्थं **शपथाः कृताः** । अस्मिन्न् अर्थे च भगवतः कृष्णद्वैपायनस्याख्यानम् उदाहर्तव्यम् । पुष्करेषु[^८६] तेष्व् अपहारितेष्व् इतरेतरं सप्तर्षयः शेपिरे- "यस् ते हरति पुष्करं स इमां पापकृतो गतिं गच्छेत्" इत्यादि । **देवैर्** इन्द्रप्रभृतिभिः । इन्द्रो ह्य् अहिल्यां प्रत्यभिशप्तः[^८७] शापभयाद् बहुविधं शपथं चकार । **वसिष्ठश् चेति** पृथङ्निर्देशः प्राधान्यख्यापनार्थः । शपतं कृतवान् इत्य् अर्थः । उपपदाद् एव विशेषावगतेः शपतिः करोत्यर्थमात्रे वर्तते । यथा यज्ञं यजत इति स्वपोषं पुष्ट इति तथा शपथं सेप इति ज्ञेयम् । "शप उपलंभने" इति लिटि प्रथमपुरुषात्मनेपदैकवचने शेपे इति रूपम् ।


[^८७]:
     DK: pratyabhiśastaḥ


[^८६]:
     M G DK (1: 435): veśeṣeṣu

**पैजवनो** राजा बभूव । तस्मिन् काले विश्वामित्रेणाक्रुष्टो मण्डलम् अध्यगतः कामक्रोधाभ्यां संक्षुब्धाचरणो[^८८] ऽघासुरो यातुधानो ऽस्मीति शपथं गृहीतवान् । विश्वामित्रेणोक्तस् तस्य राज्ञः समक्षम् अनेनैव तत्पुत्रशतम् अशितम् एष हि रक्ष इति । ततः स उवाच । अद्यैव म्रिये यदि रक्षः स्याम् इत्य् आत्मन्य् अनिष्टाशंसनम् अत्र शपथः । पुत्रदारादिशिरःस्पर्शने एतद् अनिष्टासंशनं शपथो मन्तव्यः ॥ ८.११० ॥


[^८८]:
     M G DK: saṃśodhyacaraṇo
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This is a commendatory supplement to the foregoing injunction of having
recourse to oaths.

‘*By the great sages*’—*i.e*., by the seven sages, called ‘*Saptarṣi*,’
and the rest;—‘*oaths have been taken, for the purposes of a
case*,’—*i.e*., for the purpose of arriving at a decision regarding
doubtful cases.

In this connection the story recounted by the revered Kṛṣṇadvaipāyana
may be cited as an example. On one occasion when their lotuses had been
stolen, the seven sages swore among themselves—‘he who has stolen your
lotus shall go the way of sinners,’ and so forth.

‘*By the Gods*’—Indra and the rest, also; *e.g*., when Indra was accused
in relation to Ahalyā, he swore many oaths, being afraid of being
cursed.

‘Vashistha’ has been mentioned separately, for the purpose of indicating
his special importance;—he also swore; the term ‘oath’ itself conveying
the sense of *swearing*, the verb ‘*swore*’ should be taken in the sense
of ‘took’; just as we have such expressions as ‘sacrifices a sacrifice,’
‘nourished with self-nourishment,’—so have we also the expression
‘*swore an oath*.’ ‘*Shepe*’ is the third person singular form in the
Past Perfect tense of the root ‘*shap*’ to *swear*.

*Before the king Paijavanu*;—Sudās, the son of Pijavana was a king; and,
during his reign, on being accused by Viśvāmitra in the midst of an
assembly, Vashistha was beset with anger and desire and took the oath
with regard to his being a^(‘)demon’; in the presence of that same king
he had been accused of having ‘devoured his hundred sons’ and hence
being a ‘demon’; whereupon he swore—^(‘)may I die to-day, if I am a
demon!’—this invoking of an undesirable contingency upon himself being
what is called an ‘oath.’ In a case where people swear by laying their
hands upon the head of their wife or children, the ‘oath’ consists in
invoking evil upon these latter.—(110)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Paijavana*’ is another name for king Sudās, say Nārāyāṇa and Kullūka.

For the story of the seven sages, see the Mahābhārata 13.93; 13. “See
Sāyana on Ṛgveda 7.104.15, which is considered to contain the oath
sworn.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 406);—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (62a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (1.243, 244).—‘Of gods and sages even, the taking of oaths is
recorded. Vasiṣṭha took an oath when he was accused of having assumed
the shape of an evil spirit. The seven *Ṛṣis* resolutely took an oath
together with Indra, in order to clean themselves mutually of suspicion,
when each was suspected of having stolen lotus-fibres.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.461).—‘Ordeals are known as *divya*, *divine*, because
they were used by the *devas*, gods, in the discrimination of difficult
cases.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अप्य् अन्ये महर्षयः । तथा च व्यासो "यस् ते हरति पुष्करम्" इति शपथाख्यानकं प्रोवाच । एवं च सत्यधर्मपरिहारापेक्षया —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

110	Both by the great sages and the gods oaths have been taken for the purpose of (deciding doubtful) matters; and Vasishtha even swore an oath before king (Sudas), the son of Pigavana.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/111_na_vRthA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>111 न वृथा ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

न वृथा शपथं कुर्यात्  
स्वल्पे ऽप्य् अर्थे नरो बुधः ।  
वृथा हि शपथं कुर्वन्  
प्रेत्य चेह च नश्यति  ॥ ८.१११ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/111_na_vRthA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The wise man shall not take an oath improperly; taking an improper oath, one becomes ruined here as well as after death.—(111)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

मिथ्याशपथे फलाख्यानम् एतत् । **वृथा** अन्यथा असत्यम् इति यावत् । तत्रापह्रियमाणसुवर्णादिद्रव्यजात्यपेक्षो ऽनृतशपथदोषो ऽन्यथाशपथे स्वल्पे, गरीयसि तु कार्ये गौरवाद् अधिकतरो दोषो ऽस्त्य् एव । प्रेत्य नाशो नरकम्, इह महद् अयशः । प्रमाणान्तरे तु ज्ञाते[^८९] राजदण्डः ॥ ८.१११ ॥


[^८९]:
     M G: tv ajñāte
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse describes the effect of improper swearing, ‘*improper*’
meaning *contrary to truth*, *false*.

The gravity of the sin of ‘false swearing’ is dependent upon the nature
of the property stolen—be it goods or something else,—and also upon that
of the caste of the person involved and so forth. But even in minor
matters one should not swear falsely; in more serious matters of course,
the sin is more heinous.

‘*Ruin after death*’ consists in falling into hell; and ‘*ruin here*’ is
in the form of public obloquy, and also punishment at the hands of the
king, in the event of the true facts being discovered by other
means.—(111)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vṛthā*’—‘False’ (Medhātithi, Nārāyaṇa and Nandana);—‘needlessly, in
small matters’ (Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 229),—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p.406);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavāhara,
89a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (1.257, 258).—‘Where no one declares himself ready to undergo
punishment, an ordeal cannot take place. An ordeal shall be administered
to litigants when there is reason for it, not otherwise. Therefore an
intelligent, virtuous, righteous and wise king (or judge) should abstain
from administering any one of the five ordeals, unless both parties
consent to it.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

इयं च मिथ्याशपथनिन्दा प्रत्यवायदर्शनेन प्रतिषिद्धवर्जनार्थापि सती सत्यशपथप्रशंसार्था सम्पद्यत इत्य् अविपर्ययः । सामर्थ्याद् अस्य मिथ्याशपथस्य सर्वत्र प्रत्यवायहेतुत्वे प्राप्ते; यत्र तन् नेष्यते प्रत्यवायहेतुत्वम् अस्य, तत्रेदं तद् अपवादार्थम् आरभ्यते ॥ ८.११२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

111	Let no wise man swear an oath falsely, even in a trifling matter; for he who swears an oath falsely is lost in this (world) and after death.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/112_kAminIShu_vivAheShu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>112 कामिनीषु विवाहेषु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

कामिनीषु विवाहेषु  
गवां भक्ष्ये तथेन्धने ।  
ब्राह्मणाभ्युपपत्तौ च  
शपथे नाऽस्ति पातकम्  ॥ ८.११२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/112_kAminIShu_vivAheShu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

There is no serious offence in swearing to women, or in connection with marriages, fodder for cows, or fuel, or for the sake of a Brāhmaṇa.—(112)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कामः प्रीतिविसेषो विशिष्टेन्द्रियस्पर्शजन्य,ः स यासु भवति पुरुषस्य ताः **कामिन्यो** भार्यावेश्यादयः[^९०] । तत्र यः शपथः कामसिद्ध्यर्थो यथा "नाहम् अन्यां कामये प्राणेश्वरी मे त्वम्" इत्याद्यः । यत् तु[^९१] "संप्रयुज्यस्व मया, इदं त्वया देयम्, दास्ये" इति, तत्र भवत्य् एव दोषो वृथाशपथे[^९२] । विषयसप्तमी चेयं न निमित्तसप्तमी । तेन यस्याम् एवैकाकिन्यां यथाप्य् एते तत्रोक्तरूपशपथे न[^९३] दोषः । निमित्तसप्तम्यां तु निमित्ते परद्रव्यापहारे दोषः स्यात् । अतश् च "कामाद् दशगुणं पूर्वम्" (म्ध् ८.१२१) इत्यादिकं दण्डविधानं न युज्यते । तथापि[^९४] निमित्तानन्तरकृते विवादे[^९५] ऽस्त्य् एव वृथाशपथदोषः[^९६] । एवं सर्वत्र ।


[^९६]:
     M G add: eva; DK: vṛthāśapathe doṣaḥ


[^९५]:
     M G: vivādo; DK: vivādato


[^९४]:
     M G DK add: sa hi


[^९३]:
     M G omit: na


[^९२]:
     J omits: vṛthā-


[^९१]:
     M G: yantu; J: yas tu; 


[^९०]:
     M G: -vaśādayaḥ

**विवाहेषु** । न त्वयान्या वोढव्या न वान्यो वोढव्य इति अन्यस्यापि सुहृदादेर् विवाहार्थम् एवंविधम् अनृतम् अदोषः । न पुनर् जात्यपह्नवादौ । **गवां भक्ष्ये** । गवाम् यवससिद्ध्यर्थं[^९७] मयापहर्तव्यम्, न मयापहृतं[^९८] परस्य चातत्संबन्धिभिर् युक्तस्य[^९९] वृथासाक्ष्ये शपमानस्य न दोषः । एवम् **इन्धने** । **ब्राह्मणानाम् अभ्युपपत्तिर्** अनुग्रहः । 



[^९९]:
     J: abhiktasya


[^९८]:
     M G DK add: na mayāpahartavyaṃ


[^९७]:
     M G add: na

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;सर्ववर्णानुग्रहे ऽनुज्ञातम् एव । किम् इह पुनर्वचनेन । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;केचिद् आहुः । शपथो ब्राह्मणे ऽनुज्ञायते, शूद्रादिषु त्व् अनृतम् एव । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;एतच्[^१००] च "तद् धि[^१०१] सत्याद् विशिष्यते" (म्ध् ८.१०४) इति वचनान् नैतद् अनृतम् । अतो न तत्र प्रतिषेधः । प्रतिषेधो[^१०२] ह्य् असौ वृथाशपथस्य[^१०३] । पूर्वेण प्रतिषिद्धस्य प्रतिप्रसवशास्त्रम् एतत् । तस्मात्[^१०४] सर्ववर्णानुग्रहे शपमानस्य न दोषः । 


[^१०४]:
     M G J omit: tasmāt


[^१०३]:
     M G: vṛthāśapathaḥ


[^१०२]:
     M G J omit: pratiṣedho


[^१०१]:
     M G: na hi


[^१००]:
     M G DK: tac

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;किम् 	अर्थं तर्हीदम् ।

<u>उच्यते</u> । तत्र वधात् परित्राणम् उक्तं सर्ववर्णविषयम् । **अभ्युपपत्तिस्** तु ब्राह्मणस्यैव । सा हि धनलाभादिना संभवति । सर्वतश् च परसंबन्धिषु[^१०५] क्रियास्व् एवंविधासु शपथाभ्यनुज्ञानम् उपायान्तरेण तत्सिद्ध्यसंभव एव द्रष्टव्यम् ॥ ८.११२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Kāminīṣu*’—‘*Kāma*’ is a particular form of pleasure caused through
the tactile organ; and those who are productive of such pleasure are
called ‘*Kāminī*,’—which is a terra that stands for *wife*, *courtesans*
and so forth. To these if one swears, for the fulfilment of his
desire—in such words as ‘I do not love any other woman, thou art the
queen of my heart,’ etc.,—there is nothing wrong in this; though, if
after meeting the women, and on being asked by her to give a certain
thing, he swears falsely that he would give it to her,—then this is
certainly wrong.

‘*Śapathe*,’ ‘*in swearing*’;—the Locative here signifies the *subject*,
and not the *purpose*. Hence the meaning is that there is nothing wrong,
only in that form of oath which is sworn in connection only with that
single woman with whom the man is in love. If, however, the Locative
signified the *purpose*, then there would he nothing wrong in swearing
for the purpose of robbing others of their property; and in that case
what is declared (in 121 below) regarding the heavier punishment, in the
case of perjury through lust, being ‘ten times’ would not be proper.

Even in the case of the woman, if the man swears falsely in a dispute
with her, relating to other matters,—he commits a sin. Similarly in
other cases.

‘*In connection with marriages*’;—when one says ‘this man has married
another woman,’ or ‘that woman should ho married by you,’ and so forth;
such lying, also in connection with the marriage of friends and others,
is not sinful, but not so the concealing of the real caste of the bride
and such details.

‘*Fodder for cows*’;—when, for the sake of obtaining fodder for cows,
one has been constrained to commit theft, but denies it,—then if called
to bear testimony, if the witness should swear to his not having done
the act,—there is nothing wrong in this.

Similarly with ‘*fuel*.’

‘*For the sake of Brāhmaṇas*,’—for conferring some benefit on Brāhmaṇas.

“Lying for the sake of all castes having been already permitted (in
104), why should this be repeated here?”

Some people offer the following explanation:—In the case of Brāhmaṇas
*false swearing* is permitted, while in that of the Śūdra and other
castes, it is simple *lying that is sanctioned*.

This however is not right; as under 104, it has been declared that ‘such
lying is preferable to truth’; so that what is sanctioned there is not
*lying* at all. The fact of the matter is that the said verse is not a
prohibition; it provides an exception to the prohibition of false
swearing contained in the preceding verse; and hence there should he
nothing wrong in swearing for the sake of any caste.

“Why then should the declaration in the present verse be made?”

What has been permitted under 104 is lying with a view to save the men
from *death*, which refers to all castes; for the purpose of *conferring
a benefit*, however, it is permitted only in the ease of the *Brāhmaṇa*;
as in the case of the other castes, the man might be prompted to lie
also by greed for money and other motives.

In all these oases also the permission of false oath applies to only
those eases where the purpose cannot he served without it, by any other
means—(112)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 229), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Kāminīṣu*,’ when conversing with a woman in secret
one may swear falsely for the purpose of satisfying her;—similarly for
the purpose of bringing about a marriage, for obtaining food for cows,
for obtaining fuel necessary for offerings, and for saving a
Brāhmaṇa;—and in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 406).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.35).—‘Men may speak an untruth in marriage, during
dalliance, when their lives are in danger, or the loss of their entire
property is imminent, and for the sake of a Brāhmaṇa.’

*Gautama* (23.29-31).—‘Some declare that an untruth spoken in marriage,
during dalliance, in jest, or while one is in severe pain, is not
reprehensible. But that is certainly not the case when the untruth
concerns the *guru*; for if one lies even in his heart to his *guru*,
regarding even small matters, he destroys himself, his seven descendants
and seven ancestors.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

कामिन्या कामतन्त्राभियोगे यः प्रतिज्ञातार्थसम्पादनार्थमिथ्याशपथः क्रियते तत्रे नास्ति पातकधर्म इत्य् अर्थः । एवं विवाहे कृताकृतसंदेहे अभियोगे वास्य कर्माङ्गभूतानां च गवां भक्तस्य हरणाभियोगेन गोमात्रस्य व्यवस्थासामर्थ्यात् । एवं च शास्त्रवद् अग्नीन्धनापहरणाभियोगे मिथ्याशपथे नास्त्य् अधर्मः, येन शास्त्रलक्षणाव् एव धर्माधर्मौ । अन्येन तु कारणेन गोभक्तेन्धनयोर् विभावितस्य सतो दण्डो यथाशास्त्रं भवेत् । ब्राह्मणस्य च तत्र शरीरलक्षणाभ्युपपत्ताव् एवम् एव स्यात् । न सर्वस्याइवाभ्यवपत्तिः, न्यायकारिणः कर्तव्या । ब्राह्मणा[द् अन्यस्य न न्याय]कारिणो ऽप्य् आरम्भसामर्थ्याद् विज्ञायते । स्थिताम् सत्यशपथक्रियाम् इदानींनिर्दिश्यन्ते वर्णविशेषसंनियोगेन शपथाः स्वरूपतः ॥ ८.११३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

112	No crime, causing loss of caste, is committed by swearing (falsely) to women, the objects of one's desire, at marriages, for the sake of fodder for a cow, or of fuel, and in (order to show) favour to a Brahmana.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/113_satyena_shApayed.md">
<details open><summary><h3>113 सत्येन शापयेद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सत्येन शापयेद् विप्रं  
क्षत्रियं वाहनायुधैः ।  
गो-बीज-काञ्चनैर् वैश्यं  
शूद्रं सर्वैस् तु पातकैः  ॥ ८.११३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/113_satyena_shApayed.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa should be made to swear by truth, the Kṣatriya by conveyances and weapons, the Vaiśya by cattle, grains and gold, and the Śūdra by all sins.—(113)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^१०६]:
     The reading should probably be "ebhis", glossed as "vakṣyamāṇāni" and "vakṣyamāṇaiḥ" at 8.88; see also the citation of this phrase at 8.99, where "ebhis" is used.

ननु च यद्य् अहम् एवंकुर्यां तद् इदम् अनिष्टम् आप्नुयाम् इति संकीर्तनक्रियाशपथं तं यः कारयेत् स **शापयेद्** इत्य् उच्यते । **सत्येन** शपे सत्यादिनिबन्धनो ऽयं धर्मो वा मे निष्फलः स्याद् इति । एवं चायुधानाम् अपि करणत्वं वाहनानां च । एतैर् आत्मानं शपतो न वा निष्फलानि स्युर् इति । **गोबीजकाञ्चनानि** वैश्यो हस्तेन स्पर्शयित्वाभिशपेद् एतानि वा मे निष्फलानित् पूर्ववत् । **शूद्रं सर्वैस् तु पातकैः** "वक्ष्यमाणानि पातकानि मे स्युः" इति शूद्रो वाच्यते ॥ ८.११३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In as much as the act of ‘swearing’ consists in invoking upon oneself
evil consequences,—such as ‘If I do this may such and such an evil
befall me,’—when a man is made to say ‘I swear by truth,’ what is meant
is—‘may all my merit due to truthfulness become futile.’

‘*Conveyances*’ and ‘*weapons*’ also are the means of swearing in this
same sense; when one swears by these it means—‘may these be useless for
me.’

‘*Cattle, grains and gold*,’—the Vaiśya should be made to swear by
touching these; which would mean ‘may these be useless for me.’

‘*The Śūdra by all sins*’;—the *Śūdra* should be made to say—‘may the
following sins befall me.’—(113)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.73), which adds the following
notes:—To the Brāhmaṇa he should administer the oath—‘If you tell a lie
your truthfulness shall perish’; to the Kṣatriya, ‘your conveyances and
weapons shall be futile’; to the Vaiśya, ‘your cattle, seeds and gold
shall be useless;’ to the Śūdra, ‘if you tell a lie all the sins shall
accrue to thee.’ It adds that verse 102 provides an exception to the
rule here laid down.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 19), and again on p. 38;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 78);—in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 611),
which adds the following notes:—The Brāhmaṇa he shall cause to take the
oath in the form ‘what I say is quite *true*,’ and what he says after
this should be accepted as true;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 336);—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (62a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 88b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (8.20-23).—‘The Brāhmaṇa witness should be asked to *declare*:
the Kṣatriya to *declare the truth*; the Vaiśya should be addressed
thus—“*Thy kine*, *grain and gold shall yield thee no fruit if thou wert
to lie*”: the Śūdra should be addressed thus—“*Thou shall have to atone
for all heavy crimes if thou wert to lie*.”’

*Nārada* (1.248).—‘Let him cause the Brāhmaṇa to swear by truth, the
Kṣatriya by his conveyance and by his weapons, the Vaiśya by his gold,
grains, cows and so forth; or all by venerable deities or deified
ancestors, or by their own pious gifts or meritorious deeds.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

असाक्षिके तत्त्वाभिगमार्थं ब्राह्मणादीन् वर्णान् अभियुक्तान् यथोपदेशं शपथैर् एभिः शापयेत् ॥ ८.११४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

113	Let the (judge) cause a Brahmana to swear by his veracity, a Kshatriya by his chariot or the animal he rides on and by his weapons, a Vaisya by his kine, grain, and gold, and a Sudra by (imprecating on his own head the guilt) of all grievous offences (pataka).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/114_agniM_vAhArayed.md">
<details open><summary><h3>114 अग्निं वाहारयेद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अग्निं वाहारयेद् एनम्  
अप्सु चैनं निमज्जयेत् ।  
पुत्र-दारस्य वाप्य् एनं  
शिरांसि स्पर्शयेत् पृथक्  ॥ ८.११४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/114_agniM_vAhArayed.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Or, he may make him fetch fire, or make him dive under water, or make him touch the heads of his son and wife severally.—(114)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अग्निम् आहारयेद् एनं** हस्तेनाश्वत्थपर्णव्यवहितेन तयोः प्रदेशान्तरं सप्तपदसंहितम् इत्यादि**स्मृत्यन्तरान्** निपुणतो ऽन्वेष्यम् । पारंपर्यप्रसिद्धेश् चैतद् एवोच्यते । **अप्सु** जले **निमज्जयेत्** प्राड्विवाक इत्यर्थः । **पुत्रदारशिरांसि स्पर्शयेत्** । पुत्रस्य दारस्य शिरः स्पर्शयन् हस्तेन, शपथादिकाराद् वाचापि,[^१०७] शपथस्यैवंरूपत्वाद् इत्य् उक्तम् । **पृथग्** एकैकस्य ॥ ८.११४ ॥


[^१०७]:
     M G DK (1:438): vācā ca
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*He shall make him fetch water*’—with the hand, with only the leaf of
the fig tree intervening. As for the other details, regarding the man
going seven steps and so forth,—all this may be found in other *Smṛtis*
(*e.g*., Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*, 103, and Nārada 2.296). The matter
being well known by tradition, our author has simply stated the
‘fetching of fire.’

‘*He*,’ *i.e*., the Judge—‘shall make him dive under water.’

‘*He shall make him touch the heads of his son and wife,
secerally*,’—the man shall touch the head with his hand; and as this
occurs in the context dealing with ‘oaths,’ the man should be made to
utter the swearing words also.

‘*Severally*’—separately, one by one.—(114)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 694);—the second half in
*Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 611);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 71b and
88b), which says that the touching of the head is to be done with the
right hand.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.114-116)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.96-113).—‘The Balance for women, children, aged
persons, the lame, the Brāhmaṇa and the invalid; Fire or Water or seven
*Yavas* or seven Poisons for the Śūdra. Neither the Plough-share nor the
Poison nor the Balance shall he used in suits whose value is less than a
thousand *paṇas*; hut in connection with the business of the King, or
when one is accused of heinous crimes, the pure men shall always use
these. (Then follows the detailed procedure of the ordeals.)’

*Viṣṇu* (Chapters 10 to 14).—\[Rules regarding ordeal by Balance in
Chap. 10, regarding that by fire in Chap. 11: ‘That man whose hands are
burnt ever so little should be deemed guilty; but if he remains wholly
unburnt, he is freed from the charge regarding that by Water, in Chap.
12: ‘The defendant should enter water;...... if he is not seen above the
water during the time that a man brings back a discharged arrow, he is
proclaimed innocent; hut in the contrary case, he is declared guilty,
even though only one limb of his may have become visible;’—regarding
that by Poison in Chap. 13:—and regarding that by Sacred Libation, in
Chap. 14.\]

*Nārada* (1.251-253).—‘Holy Manu has ordained that five kinds of ordeals
should be administered to those involved in a doubtful case, specially
if the matter under dispute is of a recondite nature. The Balance, Fire,
Water, Poison and fifthly, Consecrated Water are the ordeals ordained
for the purgation of high-minded persons. Those ordeals have been
ordained by Nārada, for the purpose of proving the innocence of
criminals who are defendants in a law-suit, and in order that right may
be discerned from wrong.’ \[Then follow detailed instructions regarding
the ordeals, up to verse 348.\]—‘If the members of the court should
declare him unhurt, he shall he honourably released as innocent; if he
is burnt, he shall receive due punishment’ (363).—‘If the man returning
with the discharged arrow does not see the defendant rising in water,
the defendant should he acquitted; otherwise he is guilty; even though
only one limb of his may have become visible’ (311-312).

*Bṛhaspati* (10.4-2).—‘The Balance, Fire, Water, Poison, and fifthly,
Sacred Libation, *sixthly* grains of rice, *seventhly*, a hot piece of
gold, are declared to he *ordeals*;—the Plough-share is mentioned as the
eighth; the ordeal by Dharmas the ninth. Truth, a vehicle, weapons,
cows, grains, gold, venerable gods and Brāhmaṇas, the heads of sons and
wives,—by these have oaths to be taken. When a dispute between two
litigants has arisen regarding a debt or some other matter, that ordeal
is to be administered which is in keeping with the amount of the sum in
dispute and with the character and strength of the person to he
examined. The ordeal by Poison should he administered where property
worth a thousand has been stolen; that by Fire when it is a quarter less
than that; when the charge concerns four hundred, the Hot Piece of Gold
should be administered; when three hundred, Grains of Rice should be
used; and the Sacred Libation, when it is half of that; when a hundred
has been stolen, or falsely denied, purgation by Dharma should be
administered; thieves of cows should be subjected, by preference, to
ordeal by the Plough-share.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.493 *et seq*.).—‘When the plaintiff is not prepared to
accept the result of the ordeal as final, the ordeal shall not be
administered: an ordeal is to be administered to the Accused only; never
shall the judge ask the accuser to go through the ordeal; but if he so
wills it, he may be put through it. In the case of those who have been
suspected by the King, ordeal may be prescribed. In cases of adultery
and incestuous intercourse, and of heinous offences, ordeal shall be
administered; there is no other proof. In the case of those against whom
there is a presumptive charge of theft, the ordeal of lifting a small
piece of metal out of boiling oil is ordained. In the case of indictment
for murder, even though human evidence be available, if the accuser
volunteers to have recourse to ordeal, the human evidence may be
ignored. Where the witness that is produced is suspected of dishonesty,
the King shall, before admitting his evidence, test him by means of an
ordeal.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.40).—‘Whenever a perjured witness has given false evidence in
a suit, the King must reverse the judgment; and whatever has been done
should be regarded as undone.’

*Nārada* (2.40).—‘When a man has lost his cause through the dishonesty
of witnesses or judges, the cause may be tried anew.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

शूद्रस्य वृत्तापेक्षयाग्न्यादयो ऽपि कल्प्येरन् । शपथैर् एवम् । तत्राग्निहरणे सप्तपदाश्वत्थपत्रैर् इयद्भिर् व्यवधानम् इति [स्मृत्यन्तरो]पेक्षयैतत् स्यात्; इहावचनं च गुणविधेः, स्मृतिपारम्पर्याविच्छेदात् । तथाप्सु निमज्जने कालः ॥ ८.११५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

114	Or the (judge) may cause the (party) to carry fire or to dive under water, or severally to touch the heads of his wives and children.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/115_yam_iddho.md">
<details open><summary><h3>115 यम् इद्धो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यम् इद्धो न दहत्य् अग्निर्  
आपो नोन्मज्जयन्ति च ।  
न चार्तिम् ऋच्छति क्षिप्रं  
स ज्ञेयः शपथे शुचिः  ॥ ८.११५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/115_yam_iddho.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He whom the blazing fire burns not, or whom the water does not throw up, or who does not speedily suffer some misfortune, should be regarded as pure on his oath.—(115)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तप्तायसपिण्डो ऽयम् अनवद्य[^१०८] गृहीतो न दहति । **आपश् च** नोर्ध्वं प्लावयन्ति । सत्य**शपथे** कोशादौ[^१०९] **न** **नार्तिम् ऋच्छति** पीडां न प्राप्नोति । "रोगो ऽग्निः" (म्ध् ८.१०८) इत्य् अत्रोक्तां[^११०] । **स** शुद्धः **शुचिर्** निर्दोषः । **क्षिप्रं** चतुर्दश वाहान्य् अवधिः स्मृत्यन्तरात् ॥ ८.११५ ॥


[^११०]:
     M G: atroktaṃ; J: anyatrokam; 


[^१०९]:
     M G: kauśādau; J: keśādau (this mistake carried into Jha's translation).


[^१०८]:
     M G: 'yaṃ avadya
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Blazing*’—flaming.

A red-hot iron-ball, when held by an innocent person, does not burn him;
the water does not make him float on the surface, if he has sworn truly;
he also does not suffer ‘*misfortune*,’—*i.e*. trouble, in regard to his
hair and other parts of his body. ‘Illness’ has already been mentioned
before.

Such a person is to ‘*be regarded as pure*’—*i.e*., innocent.

‘*Speedily*’—*i.e*., within a period of fourteen days,—as declared in
another *Smṛti*.—(115)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

See Atharva Veda 2.12; Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.16.1.

‘*Kṣipram*’—‘Within fourteen days’ (Medhātithi); ‘within three
fortnights’ (Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (62b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.114-116)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.114].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

दहनोन्मज्जनाभ्याम् आर्तिः पृथग् उपदेशसामर्थ्यात् अन्यारोग्याद्यभिघातलक्षणा । सा चोक्ता पुरस्तात्- "यस्य दृश्येत सप्ताहाद् उक्तवाक्यस्य साक्षिणः रोगो ऽग्निर् ज्ञातिमरणम्" इति । ननु च साक्ष्यनृतविभावनार्था सोक्ता । समानकारणत्वात् तु मिथ्याशपथभावनार्थापि सैवेह स्यात् । अन्यार्तेर् अनिर्देशाद् इह सैव गम्यते । अत्र कश्चिद् आह- "इद्धो नामाग्निर् न धक्ष्यति नोन्मज्जयिष्यन्त्य् अपः" इति दृष्टविरुद्धम् एतत् । न हि महाभूतस्यचैतन्यात् स्वभावव्यतिकरो निमित्तम् अन्तरेणोपलभ्यते । मन्त्रौषधाभ्यां तु भवति । तद् इह न मानम् । अत्र हि सत्यशपथप्रयोगोपहृतयोर् अग्*यम्भसोअर् (?) अयं निमित्ततः स्वभावव्यतिकरः स्यात् । सदेवतत्त्वाच् च तयोर् विशेषतो ऽस्मिन् काले सनिमित्तः स्याद् अयं व्यतिकरो, यतः तद् अचैतन्यम् अकारणम् । जयः तद्विपर्यये च पराजय इति साध्यम् । किं व्यवधानकालयोर् अल्पमहत्त्वाभ्याम् एतौ भवतः, उत दैवकृताव् इति । असमानं चैतत्, येन साम्य ऽपि व्यवधानकालयोर् एतौ दृश्येते । तस्मान् नेमौ तद्वैषम्यकृतौ विज्ञेयौ । यतश् च जिह्वया तप्तायःपिण्डाभिस्पर्शनेनोभयं दृष्टम्, अतो नैतयोर् वचनक्रिययोस् त्रासनमात्रम् एव प्रयोजनम् । कथं नामायम् अभीतः प्रपद्येतेति । यच् च पुनर् इदम् उच्यते । यदि च किल त्रासनार्थवादो भवति ततो "नाग्निर् ददाह रोमापि" इति रोमादहनवचनम् अनर्थवद् भवति । इतरथा ह्य् अग्निहरणविधौ कल्प्यमाने हस्ततलयोर् लोमाभावाल् लोमादहनवचनम् अनर्थकं स्यात् । अपि चेक्षिते त्व् अग्निहरणे यथा कथंचिद् अग्निसंबन्धस् तु यत इति, अत्र रोमशब्दो ऽयं न स्वार्थवाची गुणतो लोकपदत्वार्थः, यथोक्तसामर्थ्यात् । अतः साक्षिमिथ्यावचनवन् मिथ्याशपथवच् चाग्निहर्णोदकनिमज्जने अपि तद्वद् एव विज्ञेये इति ॥ ८.११६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

115	He whom the blazing fire burns not, whom the water forces not to come (quickly) up, who meets with no speedy misfortune, must be held innocent on (the strength of) his oath.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/116_vatsasya_hy.md">
<details open><summary><h3>116 वत्सस्य ह्य् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वत्सस्य ह्य् अभिशस्तस्य  
पुरा भ्रात्रा यवीयसा ।  
नाऽग्निर् ददाह रोमाऽपि  
सत्येन जगतः स्पशः  ॥ ८.११६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/116_vatsasya_hy.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Formerly when Vatsa was accused by his younger brother, fire, the world’s spy, did not burn even a hair of his, because of truth.—(116)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कथं पुनर् अग्निर् न धक्ष्यति, आपो[^१११] नोन्मज्जयिष्यन्ति । न हि महाभूतानि विपरियन्ति स्वभावतो ऽचैतन्याद्[^११२] इति पर्यनुयोगम् आशङ्क्यार्थवादेनोक्तम् अर्थं दृढीकरोति । यद्य् अप्य् अयम् अन्वयव्यतिरेकसमधिगम्यो ऽर्थः प्रत्यकषवेद्यो[^११३] वा तथापि धूर्तकल्पितेन्द्रजालवद् भावितम् उग्रबिभीषिकासञ्जनमात्रं फलं[^११४] शपथागोरणम् इति मन्यमानो वैदिकं निदर्शनम् उपन्यसेत्[^११५] । भवन्ति प्रतिपत्तारो ऽर्थागमेन पूर्ववृत्तदर्शनाद् दृढतां प्रतिपद्यन्ते । 


[^११५]:
     J: upanyasati


[^११४]:
     M G: -jālavad bhāntimahanādatramukhabibhīṣikāsañjanamātraṃ phalaṃ; J: -jālavad bhrāntivad atra mukhabibhīṣikāsañjanamātraphalaṃ (clearly the reading here is quite uncertain).


[^११३]:
     M G: pratyakaṣaḥ śābdo; J: -vedyā


[^११२]:
     M G J read caitanyād without the avagraha.


[^१११]:
     DK (1: 439): āpaś ca

- वत्सो नाम काण्व ऋषिर् अभवत् । स च कनीयसा वैमात्रेण **भ्रात्राभिशस्त**[^११६] आक्रुष्टः "न त्वम् असि ब्राह्मणः शूद्रापुत्रः" इति । स तं प्रत्युवाच "सत्येनाग्निं प्रविशामि यदि न ब्राह्मणः" इति । तस्येदम् उक्तवतः प्रविष्टस्य **नाग्निर् ददाह रोमापि** । कथम् । **सत्येन** हेतुना । 


[^११६]:
     M G: bhrātro'bhiśapta

- कथम् अग्निः सत्यं जानातीति चेत्, अत आह **जगतः स्पशः** । गूढात्मा परकीयकृताकृतज्ञः स्पश उच्यते । स च चारः प्रणिधिर् इति च प्रसिद्धिः । अग्निर् हि भगवान् सर्वभूतान्तरचारी कृताकृतानां वेदिता । तथा च छान्दोग्ये ताण्डके प्रयोगः- "देवासुरसेनयोर् अभ्यन्तरे यो ऽग्निर् इति, गौतमो ऽग्निम् उपेत्योवाच-[^११७] इह नो भवान् स्पशश् चरतु" इत्यादि । अथ वा विशेषनिदर्शने ऽपि[^११८] पञ्चविंशब्राहमणम् उदाहार्यम्- "वत्सश् च ह वै मेधातिथिश् च काण्वाव्[^११९] आस्ताम् । तं वत्सं मेधातिथिर् आक्रोशत्- अब्राह्मणो ऽसि" इत्यादि "तस्य लोम च नौषत्[^१२०]" इत्यन्तम् (प्ब् १४.६.६) ।


[^१२०]:
     M G: halam eva nauṣat; J: hālam eva vauṣadham


[^११९]:
     M G J: kāśyapāv


[^११८]:
     M G: arthavācittviṣedarśane 'pi; J: arthavācinidarśane 'pi


[^११७]:
     M G J: abhyantare gautamam āśrayanti gautamam indraṃ draḍhayet tatra āha

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च चौरा अपि न दह्यन्ते । साधवो ऽपि दह्यमाना दृश्यन्ते । तत् कथं शपथे आश्वासः ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;उच्यते । न दृश्येन व्यभिचारेण व्यवस्थेयम् अपनेतुं शक्यते, कदाचित्कत्वाद् व्यभिचारस्य । प्रत्यक्षादिष्व् अपि प्रमाणेषु दृश्यत एव तादृशो व्यभिचारः, न च तानि न प्रमाणम् । अथ व्यभिचारवन्ति नैव प्रत्यक्षादिशब्दवाच्यानि । यद् व्यभिचरति न तत् प्रत्यक्षम्,[^१२१] यत् प्रत्यक्षं न तद् व्यभिचरतीति वचनात् । इहापि शक्यते तद् वक्तुम् । व्यभिचरतीत्य् असौ[^१२२] न[^१२३] शपथः, यः शपथः स न व्यभिचरतीति । कः पुनः शपथः । यः समतेतिकर्तव्यतामात्राद्यपग्रहणनिरूपितकुहकस्तंभनाभावः[^१२४] । विपरीतो ऽशपथः । न तादृशस्य व्यभिचारो ऽस्ति । अथापि स्यात्, तत्रापि प्राक्कृतस्य कर्मणः फलविपाको भवति, निमित्तत्वात् । कृतापराधो[^१२५] ऽपि पूर्वकृतेन गरीयसाशुभेन मुच्यते । अकृतापराधो जन्मान्तरदोषेण निगृह्यते । विचित्रा हि कर्मणां फलपाकाभिव्यक्तिहेतवः । सहस्राद् एको मिथ्या गृह्यते । उत्सर्गस्[^१२६] त्व् अमिथ्यात्वम् । पुत्रेष्टिकारीयादिष्व् अप्य् एतत् समानम् । 


[^१२६]:
     M G: utsargatas


[^१२५]:
     M G: nimittatvākṛtāparadho; DK (1: 440): akṛtāparadho


[^१२४]:
     J: -grahaṇena nirū-; M G J: -kuhakaḥ; 


[^१२३]:
     M G J omit: na


[^१२२]:
     J: yad vyabhicarati nāsau


[^१२१]:
     M G: yad vyabhicāritapratyakṣaṃ

तस्मात् साक्षिवच् छपथे ऽपि प्रत्येतव्य । ते ऽपि हि कदाचिन् मिथ्यावदन्ति[^१२७] । न भयप्रदर्शनमात्रम् एतत् । यथास्थानरूढाः[^१२८] शपथा उक्ताः सत्यं प्रतिष्ठत इति ॥ ८.११६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

*Question*.— “How can it be that fire shall not burn or that water shall
not throw up? Certainly elemental substances never renounce their
natural functions, being as they are unconscious entities.”

It is in anticipation of this objection that the author corroborates his
statement by means of a commendatory story. Though the matter in
question is one that can he ascertained either by positive and negative
induction, or by direct perception,—yet there may he people who would
regard such phenomena in the same light as a magical performance, and so
would be inclined to take all that is said regarding oaths and ordeals
merely as intended to frighten the person into telling the truth; just
in the same way as verbal threats and angry staring, etc., are used to
make men tell the truth;—and it is in view of this contingency that the
author has cited an instance from the Veda; as there are men who become
convinced of the truth of a statement when it is corroborated by past
occurrences.

*Vatsa* was a sage of the family of Kaṇva; he was ‘*accused*’—blamed—by
his younger step-brother, of being not a Brāhmaṇa, but a *Śūdra*,
whereupon he said—‘By truth, I enter fire, if I be not a Brāhmaṇa’; when
having said this, he entered the fire, ‘*the fire did not burn even his
hair*’;—and why?—‘*because of truth*.’

The question arising as to how fire can know the truth?—the answer
is—‘*fire is the world’s spy*.’ The man who, keeping his real character
concealed, comes to know what is done and what is not done by others, is
called ‘spy,’ known also by such names as ‘*cāra*’, ‘*praṇidhi*’ and so
forth. The God Agni moves within all living beings, and as such, is
cognisant of all that is done or not done. We read in the *Tāṇḍya
Brāhmaṇa* that “Agni is one who lies within the gods as well as the
Asuras;—Gautama, approaching fire, said ‘May you Sir, operate within all
beings’; and then he goes on to say—‘May you Sir, move about here *as a
spy*.’” A similar passage from the *Pañcaviṃśa-Brāhmaṇa* may he
quoted;—“Vatsa and Medhātithi were two sons of Kaśyapa; Medhātithi
insulted Vatsa by saying—‘thou art not a Brāhmaṇa’; and the only remedy
of this was Fire.”

*Objection*.—“As a matter of fact however, it is found that real thieves
are not burnt by fire (when undergoing the ordeal) while innocent
persons are actually burnt. How then can any reliance he placed upon
oaths and ordeals?”

Our answer is as follows:—The principle here laid down cannot be
rejected simply on the strength of a perceptible miscarriage; because
such miscarriages are very rare. In fact, even in the case of perception
and other forms of valid cognition, such miscarriages are met with; and
yet these are not regarded as untrustworthy. Further, it has been
declared that ‘what is found to be wrong does not deserve the name of
Perception, etc.; what is found to ho wrong is not Perception; and what
is Perception is never wrong’; and on the analogy of this statement, it
may be asserted that ‘what miscarries is not an *ordeal*, and what *is*
an *ordeal* never miscarries.’ For what is an ‘ordeal’? It is that
wherein the full procedure is observed, all obstructions in the shape of
spells neutralising the force of the fire and so forth duly examined and
removed; what is contary (contrary) to this is *not* an ordeal.

And certainly an ordeal of the said kind never miscarries. Even though
there be some such miscarriage, it must be regarded as the result of
some past act of the man; in fact even a real criminal comes to be
acquitted by virtue of some previous meritorious act; while an innocent
man becomes convicted by virtue of an evil deed committed in his past
life. The causes leading up to the fruition of past acts are truly
strange. But with all this, it is only in one ease among a thousand that
an ordeal is found to fail; as a rule it is infallible; and it is
exactly the same with the *Putreṣṭi*, the *Kārīrī* and such other Vedic
sacrifices.

From all this it follows that reliance should be placed upon oaths and
ordeals also, just as on witnesses; for these latter also speak falsely
sometimes.

Thus then, what has been said regarding ordeals is not meant simply to
frighten the man. In fact, in the case of the said ordeals, it is the
truth that prevails.—(116)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“This story is told in Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa of the Sāma Veda”—Hopkins.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.114-116)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.114].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

परकृतिर् इयम् अधिकृतविध्यर्थवादार्था । "वत्सस्य ह्य् अभिशस्तस्य" इति लिङ्गाद् अभिशस्तस्यायं शपथ इति केचित् । एवं च शूद्रशपथो ऽयं न स्यात् । किं तर्हि अस्माल् लिङ्गात् ब्राह्मणस्यैवायं स्यात्; न चैतद् इष्टम्- तेन यथा ब्राह्मणविषयः श्रुतः शूद्रस्यापीति शास्त्रसामर्थ्यात् । एवम् अभिशंसने श्रुति ऽन्यत्रापि । जगतः स्पशो निश्चर इत्य् अर्थः, "इह नो भवान् स्पशश् चरतु" इति श्रुतेः ॥ ८.११७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

116	For formerly when Vatsa was accused by his younger brother, the fire, the spy of the world, burned not even a hair (of his) by reason of his veracity.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/117_yasmin_yasmin.md">
<details open><summary><h3>117 यस्मिन् यस्मिन् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यस्मिन् यस्मिन् विवादे तु  
कौटसाक्ष्यं कृतं भवेत् ।  
तत् तत् कार्यं निवर्तेत  
कृतं चाऽप्य् अकृतं भवेत्  ॥ ८.११७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/117_yasmin_yasmin.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In whatever suit false evidence should have been given, the effect of that shall cease, and what has been done shall be undone.—(117)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**यस्मिन्** व्यवहारे **कूटसाक्षिभिर्** व्यवहारः **कृतः** स्यात् स **निवर्तयितव्यः** । **कृतं चाप्य् अकृतं भवेत्** । गृहीतधनो ऽप्य् उत्तमर्णः प्रतिपाद्यितव्यः, इतरदण्डो[^१२९] गृहीतो ऽपि त्याज्यः । वाङ्मात्रेण "जितस् त्वम् असि" इति निश्चिते कार्यं निवर्तते इत्य् उच्यते । दण्डपर्यन्तं कृतम् अपीति विशेषः । वीप्सा श्लोकपूरणायाम् ॥ ८.११७ ॥


[^१२९]:
     J: itarodaṇḍo
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In a suit where a decision should have been taken on the strength of
lying witnesses,—that decision shall be reversed.

‘*What is done shall be undone i.e*., even though the creditor may have
received the amount of debt claimed, he should be made to refund it; and
the debtor shall be excused the fine that may have been imposed upon
him. In a case where the victory was merely verbal, the verdict being
simply ‘you are defeated,’—the same shall be declared to be reversed.

The decision, carried into effect, even to the realisation of the
fine,—is what is said to be ‘*done*’; and this ‘*shall cease*’, ‘*become
undone*’; the repetition of the same idea serving the purpose of filling
up the metre.—(117)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.77), to the effect that even
though the case may have been decided, yet if, even subsequently it is
found out that the witnesses had deposed falsely,—the decision should be
upset;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 337);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (p. 65a);—and
in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 39b).
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अर्धसमाप्ते निवर्तनम्, दण्डान्ते ऽपि कृते **अकृतं भवेत्** । एवं च सति पुनस् तत् परीक्ष्यं निवृत्तिवचनात् । तच् च पुनः —
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

117	Whenever false evidence has been given in any suit, let the (judge) reverse the judgment, and whatever has been done must be (considered as) undone.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/118_lobhAn_mohAd.md">
<details open><summary><h3>118 लोभान् मोहाद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

लोभान् मोहाद् भयान् मैत्रात्  
कामात् क्रोधात् तथैव च ।  
अज्ञानाद् बालभावाच् च  
साक्ष्यं वितथम् उच्यते  ॥ ८.११८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/118_lobhAn_mohAd.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Evidence is called ‘false,’ when it is due to greed, or embarrassment, or fright, or friendship, or lust, or anger, or ignorance, ok childishness.—(118)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कौटसाक्ष्यं[^१३०] लोभादिनिमित्तम्[^१३१] । विषयकथनं दण्डविशेषभावार्थम्[^१३२] । **वितथम्** असत्यम् । सर्वत्र पञ्चमी हेत्वर्था ॥ ८.११८ ॥


[^१३२]:
     DK: daṇḍaviśeṣalābhārtham


[^१३१]:
     DK: lobhādinimitta-


[^१३०]:
     M G: kauṭasākṣya-; DK (1:278): kauṭasākṣye
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

False evidence is due to greed and the rest. These have been enumerated
for the purpose of determining the exact penalty.

‘*False*’—untrue.

The Ablative throughout denotes *cause*.—(118)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 680), which adds the following
notes:—False evidence is given only through these causes;—‘*lobha*’ is
greed for wealth,—‘*moha*’ is mistake,—‘*ajñāna*’, imperfect
knowledge,—‘*bālabhāva*’ extreme youth;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (37a);—and
in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 50b).

It is quoted also in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 80).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.118-123)**

*Śukranīti* (4.5.337).—‘The man who hears false evidence, and the man
who suppresses evidence are to receive double punishment.’

*Nārada* (1.193-97).—‘One who, weighed down by the consciousness of his
guilt, looks as if he were ill, or shifts his position constantly, runs
after everybody:—who walks involuntary and without reason, and draws
deep sighs; who scratches the ground with his feet and who shakes his
arms and clothes;—whose countenance changes colour, whose forehead
sweats, whose lips become dry and who looks about and above himself;—who
makes long and irrelevant speeches as if he were in a hurry, and without
being asked;—such a person may be recognised as a false witness, and the
King should punish that sinful man.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.18).—‘A false witness may be known by his altered looks, by
his countenance changing colour, and by his talk wandering from the
subject.’

Do. (Aparārka, p. 680).—‘Of false witnesses, the whole property should
be confiscated.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.81).—‘Forgers and false witnesses should be separately
punished with line which is double the value of the suit; but the
Brāhmaṇa should be banished. The witness who having made a statement
before others, conceals it from the court, through folly,—should be made
to pay a fine eight times the value of the suit; but the Brāhmaṇa should
he banished.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अनृतवचने कारणनिर्देशो ऽयंदण्डविशेषार्थः ॥ ८.११९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

118	Evidence (given) from covetousness, distraction, terror, friendship, lust, wrath, ignorance, and childishness is declared (to be) invalid.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/119_eShAm_anyatame.md">
<details open><summary><h3>119 एषाम् अन्यतमे ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एषाम् अन्यतमे स्थाने  
यः साक्ष्यम् अनृतं वदेत् ।  
तस्य दण्डविशेषांस् तु  
प्रवक्ष्याम्य् अनुपूर्वशः  ॥ ८.११९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/119_eShAm_anyatame.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

I am going to explain, in due order, the particular punishments for him who should give false evidence from any one of these causes.—(119)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The construction to be adopted in the following verse should be—‘He who
tells a lie through greed should be fined one thousand’ and so
forth.—(119)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava*, (Vyavahāra, p. 82);—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (37a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.118-123)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.118].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

119	I will propound in (due) order the particular punishments for him who gives false evidence from any one of these motives.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/120_lobhAt_sahasram.md">
<details open><summary><h3>120 लोभात् सहस्रम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

लोभात् सहस्रं दण्ड्यस् तु  
मोहात् पूर्वं तु साहसम् ।  
भयाद् द्वौ मध्यमौ दण्डौ  
मैत्रात् पूर्वं चतुर्गुणम्  ॥ ८.१२० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/120_lobhAt_sahasram.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If through greed, he should be fined a thousand; if through embarrassment, the lowest amercement; if through fear, two middlling ones; if through friendship, four times the first.—(120)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**लोभाद्** यो वितथं वक्ति स **सहस्रं दण्डनीय** इत्य् एवं योजना[^१३३] कर्तव्या । तत्र यः परस्माद् धनम् उपादाय विअपरीतं वक्ति तस्य **लोभो** हेतुः । **मोहात्** वैचित्त्यात्[^१३४] । यथार्थवादी यथदृष्टार्थवादी च केनचिच् चित्तसंक्षोभहेतुना प्रश्नकाले व्यामूढः[^१३५] सम्यक् प्रश्नार्थम् अनवधार्यास्मृतत्वाद् वान्यथा ब्रूयात् स **मोहाद्** इत्य् उच्यते । **भयं** त्रासः । यदि मदीयेन[^१३६] सत्यवचनेनायं जीयेत, तत्रायं कदाचित् ज्ञातिधनादिबाधया मां व्यापादयेद् इत्य् आशङ्का । **सहस्रम्** इति संख्येयविशेषावगतिर् वाक्यान्तरात् पणानाम् इति । **पूर्वं तु साहसं** प्रथमम् "पणानां[^१३७] द्वे शते सार्धम्" (म्द् ८.१३८) इत्यादौ । **द्वौ मध्यमौ** साहसाव् इति विपरिणामः । **पूर्वं चतुर्गुणं** सहस्रम् एवेत्य् अर्थः । वृत्तानुरोधेन विचित्रया शब्दवृत्त्या स एवार्थः कथ्यते ॥ ८.११९–२० ॥


[^१३७]:
M G add: tu


[^१३६]:
M G: bhayena; DK omits: madīyena


[^१३५]:
M G J: vyārūḍhaḥ


[^१३४]:
M G: vicintayato; J: svabhāvato


[^१३३]:
M G DK (1: 279): prayojanā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When the man deposes falsely after receiving a bribe from another
person, his motive is *greed*.

‘*Through embarrassment*.’—Though the man may be quite truthful,
habituated to speak in strict accordance with what he has actually seen,
yet on account of some distraction of the mind, at the time of his
examination, he may be so confused as to be unable either to comprehend
the question or to recall the exact facts of the case, and thereby he
may make statements that are not true; in this case the reason is
‘*embarrassment*.’

‘*Fright*’ is *fear*, in the form of the suspicion—‘if this man was to
lose the case through my telling the truth, he would ruin me by injuring
my relations, or by making me suffer financially.’

‘*One thousand*;’—what is that to which this number appertains is to be
learnt from other passages: they are ‘*paṇas*.’

‘*Lowest amercement’—i.e*. 250 *paṇas*, as described under 138 below.

‘*Two middling ones’—i.e*., amercements; the number being changed into
the dual.

‘*Four times the first,’—i.e*. 1,000 *paṇas*.

It is through metrical considerations that the same idea is expressed in
various ways.—(120)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 82);—and in
*Mitākṣarā* (on 2.811), which adds the following notes—‘*Lobha*’ is
greed for wealth,—‘*moha*’, wrong information,—‘*bhaya*’,
fear,—‘*maitrī*’, too much affection,—‘*kāma*’, longing for intercourse
with women,—‘*krodha*’, anger. It adds that the 1,000 and other numbers
refer to so many *copper paṇas*.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 680), which adds the following notes:—The
numbers here mentioned refer to *kārṣāpaṇas*. Some people might think
that there are two kinds of perjury—one through greed and the rest, for
which the penalty shall he as prescribed by *Manu*, and another due to
other causes, for which the penalty would be that prescribed by
*Yājñavalkya* (2.81). But this would not he the right view, because as
already shown by Manu (in 118), people commit perjury only through greed
and other causes enumerated therein.

It is quoted in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 191), which says:—If the witness
lie, through avarice, he should he fined 1,000 *paṇas*,—if through
delusion, 250 *paṇas*,—if through fear 1,000 *paṇas*,—if through
friendliness 1,000 *paṇas*;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (37a), which says
that ‘thousand’ *paṇas* are meant,—‘*mohāt*’ means ‘through
absent-mindedness’—that ‘*pūrva sāhasa*’ stands for 250 *paṇas*,—‘*dvau
madhyamau*’ means ‘*dvau madhyamau sāhasau*’, which means 1,000
*paṇas*,—‘*pūrvam*’ means ‘first amercement’, four times of which means
1,000 *paṇas*.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.118-123)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.118].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

120	(He who commits perjury) through covetousness shall be fined one thousand (panas), (he who does it) through distraction, in the lowest amercement; (if a man does it) through fear, two middling amercements shall be paid as a fine, (if he does it) through friendship, four times the amount of the lowest (amercement).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/121_kAmAd_dashaguNam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>121 कामाद् दशगुणम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

कामाद् दशगुणं पूर्वं  
क्रोधात् तु त्रिगुणं परम् ।  
अज्ञानाद् द्वे शते पूर्णे  
बालिश्याच् छतम् एव तु  ॥ ८.१२१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/121_kAmAd_dashaguNam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If through lust, ten times the first; if through anger, three times the next; if through ignorance, full two hundred; and if through childishness, only a hundred.—(121)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

मन्मथः **कामः** । यत्र स्त्रियो विवदन्ते तत्संबन्ध्यन्यतरां[^१३८] कामयमानो ऽनृतं वदति, अर्धतृतीयानि सहस्राणि दण्ड्यते । **क्रोधात्** **त्रिगुणं परं** प्रथमसाहसस्य प्रकृतत्वात् ततः परो मध्यः[^१३९] । सर्वान्ते लोकविज्ञानाद् इति वा उत्तम एव परः । द्वेषः **क्रोधः** । **अज्ञानाद्** इति । यो विपरीतं प्रथमं ब्रूयाद् भ्रान्त्या, न तु[^१४०] प्रश्नकाले । **द्वे शते** दमः । प्रदर्शनम् एव विपरीतं नाभिधानम् । **बालिश्यं**[^१४१] बालभावः अप्राप्तव्यवहारता । ईषदपक्रान्तबालभावस्याप्राप्तबुद्धिस्थैर्यस्यायं बालिश्यदण्डो ऽन्यस्य त्व् असाक्षितैव ॥ ८.१२१ ॥


[^१४१]:
     M G add: vā


[^१४०]:
     M G: nanu; DK omits: na tu


[^१३९]:
     M G: vadhyaḥ


[^१३८]:
     M G: -bandhyānyataraṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Lust*,’— sexual love: when females happen to be parties to the suit,
the person who loves one of them, deposes falsely; and such a person
should be fined 2,500 *Paṇas*.

‘*If through anger, three times the next*;’—the ‘lowest amercement’
having been mentioned before, its ‘next’ is the ‘middling amercement.’
Or, on the basis of ordinary usage, ‘*para*’ may stand for the
‘highest.’

‘*Through ignorance*’;—he who, through mistake, should say what is
contrary to busts, on the spur of the moment,—and not during his regular
examination,—his punishment shall consist of ‘*two hundred*.’ This is
meant to be merely suggestive of some sort of punishment to be
inflicted; and hence it is not contrary (to what has been declared
regarding the *lowest fine* to consist of 250).

‘*Childishness*’— is *childish character*. The man who has not acquired
steadiness of mind is called ‘childish.’ The punishment here laid down
is for one who has just passed his minority; one who is still a minor
cannot be a witness at all.—(121)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 680);—in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.81),
which adds the following notes:—‘*Ajñāna*’ is imperfect knowledge,—and
‘*bāliśya*’, want of experience and knowledge;—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra p. 82);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 191), which says—‘If the
witness lies through sexual passion for some woman, he should be fined
2,500 *paṇas*,—if through anger, 2,000 *paṇas*,—if through ignorance,
200 *paṇas*’;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (37b), which says ‘*triguṇam
param*’ means ‘three times the *middle* amercement’, *i.e*., 1,500
*paṇas*,—*ajñānāt*’, from a wrong idea formed at the time of the
transaction in question,—‘*bāliśya*’ means ‘majority just attained’, a
*minor* not being admissible as a witness.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.118-123)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.118].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

121	(He who does it) through lust, (shall pay) ten times the lowest amercement, but (he who does it) through wrath, three times the next (or second amercement); (he who does it) through ignorance, two full hundreds, but (he who does it) through childishness, one hundred (panas).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/122_etAn_AhuH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>122 एतान् आहुः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एतान् आहुः कौटसाक्ष्ये  
प्रोक्तान् दण्डान् मनीषिभिः ।  
धर्मस्याऽव्यभिचारार्थम्  
अधर्मनियमाय च  ॥ ८.१२२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/122_etAn_AhuH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

They declare these penalties for false evidence to have been prescribed by the wise, for the purpose that justice may not fail and injustice hay be prevented.—(122)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उभयप्रयोजनो दण्ड इति दर्शयत्य् अवश्यानुष्ठेयत्वाय । शास्त्राचारनिरूढा व्यवस्था धर्मः, तस्याव्यभिचारो ऽनिवृत्तिर् उच्यते ॥ ८.१२२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

With a view to indicating that it is necessary to inflict the
punishments, the author shows that punishment serves two purposes.

Decision taken in strict accordance with Law and Usage is ‘*Justice*’;
and its ‘non-failing’ consists in its *not being thwarted*;—and for this
purpose the witnesses have to be punished. Though the real purpose of
all this is the finding out of what has been done and what not done; and
it is this that is reiterated here (in different words).—(122)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 82);—in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 191);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 51);—and
in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (37b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.118-123)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.118].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

त्रयः श्लोका दण्डप्रकॢप्त्यर्थाः । साक्षिणा मिथ्यावचनेषु सहस्रं शतम् इति च यद् उक्तम् अत्र तत्रा[पेक्षया] विकृतस्य वा । एवं प्रथममध्यमोत्तमसाहसग्रहणेषु विशेषतः सर्वं वक्ष्यति ॥ ८.१२०–१२३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

122	They declare that the wise have prescribed these fines for perjury, in order to prevent a failure of justice, and in order to restrain injustice.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/123_kauTasAxyan_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>123 कौटसाक्ष्यन् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

कौटसाक्ष्यं तु कुर्वाणांस्  
त्रीन् वर्णान् धार्मिको नृपः ।  
प्रवासयेद् दण्डयित्वा  
ब्राह्मणं तु विवासयेत्  ॥ ८.१२३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/123_kauTasAxyan_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king shall however fine and then banish the three castes giving false evidence; but the Brāhmaṇa he shall deprive of his clothes (and dwelling).—(123)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सकृद् अपराद्धानां पूर्वो दण्डः । अभ्यासात् प्रवर्तमानानां **दण्डयित्वा प्रवासनं** राष्ट्रान् निष्कासनम्, मरणं वार्थशास्त्रे प्रयोगदर्शनात् तद्रूपत्वाच् च दण्डविधेः । **ब्राह्मणं तु विवासयेत्** । वाससो ऽपहरणं विवासनं गृहभङ्गो वा । विवाससं[^१४२] विवासं वा[^१४३] करोति "तत् करोति" इति णिचि णाविष्टवद् इति टिलोपे रूपम् । **त्रीन् वर्णान्** इति क्षत्रादयस् त्रयः, ब्राह्मणस्य दण्डान्तरविधानात् ॥ ८.१२३ ॥


[^१४३]:
     M G J omit: vā


[^१४२]:
     J omits: vivāsasaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The penalties prescribed above are for the first offenders; for repeated
offenders there is fining, followed by ‘banishment,’—*i.e*., expulsion
from the kingdom;—or death; rules regarding the inflicting of such
penalty being met with in political science.

‘*But the Brāhmaṇa he shall deprive of his clothes*’;—‘*vivāsana*’
meaning *depriving of clothes*, or *of dwelling*. The verb is formed
from the noun ‘*vivāsa*,’ ‘homeless,’ ‘clothesless,’ with the causal
affix ‘*ṇic*,’ which makes the nominal verb ‘makes *vivāsa*.’

‘*The three Castes*’—the *Kṣatriya* and the rest;—since for the Brāhmaṇa
a separate punishment is prescribed.—(123)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Pravāsayet*’—‘Banish’ (all concur). But Medhātithi suggests ‘put to
death’, as an alternative; this is accepted by Mitākṣarā (see below).

‘*Vivāsayet*’—‘Should deprive him of his clothes (Medhātithi and
Govindarāja),—‘or homestead’ (Medhātithi, alternative);—‘banish (without
*fining*, as in the case of the other three castes)’ (Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.81), which adds the following
notes:—This rule is meant for repeated offence, as is clear from the
*present participle* affix in ‘*kurvāṇān*’ (which implies *habit*); on
the three castes, Kṣatriya and the rest, the king should impose the
aforesaid fine and then put *them to death*;—the root ‘*pravāsa*’ is
used in the sense of *killing* in works dealing with political science;
and this part of the law-book is a treatise on that science. This
*putting to death* is of various kinds—cutting the lips, cutting the
tongue and actual *killing*; which one of these is to be adopted in any
particular case will depend upon the nature of the case in regard to
which the man may have given false evidence. The Brāhmaṇa, on the other
hand, is to be fined and *banished*, removed from the kingdom; or
‘*vivāsayet*’ may mean *deprive him of his clothes*, strip him naked;—or
again ‘*vāsa*’ meaning the *dwelling house*, ‘*vivāsayet*’ may mean
‘should deprive him of his house’, his house should be demolished. In
the case of the Brāhmaṇa also, if the offence is the first one of its
kind, and the man is not found to have been actuated by any such sordid
motive as ‘greed’ and the rest,—only simple fine is to be imposed; but
if the offence is repeated, there is to be fine and also ‘*vivāsana*’,
*i*.*e*., banishment, or stripping naked, or rendering homeless; which
one of these three is to be adopted will depend upon the character of
the parties, the nature of the subject-matter of dispute and so forth.
If the Brāhmaṇa is not found to have been actuated by greed or any such
motive, if the offence is the first of its kind, and if the
subject-matter of the dispute is a petty one,—then he also is to be only
slightly fined, like the Kṣatriya and other lower castes; but if the
subject-matter of the dispute is an important one, then he is to be
*banished*. In the case of the offence being repeated, the punishment
for all the castes is to be as prescribed by Manu.

This verse is quoted also in *Aparārka* (p. 680), which explains the
meaning as follows:—The three lower castes are to be fined and banished,
while the Brāhmaṇa is to be only banished) not fined;—though if the
offence is repeated, or if the issues involved in the case are
important, the Brāhmaṇa also may be fined.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 82);—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 119);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 191), which
adds the note:—‘If a Kṣatriya or a Vaiśya or a Śūdra is found to depose
falsely repeatedly, he should, in addition to the aforesaid fines, be
banished from the country,—and in the ease of a Brāhmaṇa, he should be
banished with all his belongings’;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (37b), which
explains ‘*vivāsayet*’ as ‘should he banished from the kingdom’;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 57a), which adds the explanation
that—persons of the three castes other than the Brāhmaṇa are to he fined
and then *killed*—the ‘killing’ consisting either in cutting off the
lips or lopping off the tongue or down-right killing, in accordance with
the gravity of the offence;—the Brāhmaṇa, is to be *banished* or
*rendered naked*,—the verb ‘*vivāsayet*’ meaning ‘deprived of *vāsa*,
habitation or clothes’. It adds that all this refers to cases of
repeated perjury.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.118-123)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.118].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

[एकदानृतवादिनां दण्डाः पूर्वोक्ताः], अभ्यसतां तु कौटसाक्ष्यं त्रयाणां वर्णानां दण्डश् चायं यथाशास्त्रम् । प्रवासनं च मारणं शास्त्रान्तरे परिभाषितत्वाद्, इह च तदभ्यासान् निर्वासनम् एव [प्रतिपद्यते **ब्राह्मण]म् एव विवासयेत्** इति । गृहभङ्गेन चायोजयेद् इत्य् अर्थः । पूर्वस्मिंश् चार्थे प्रवासनशब्दस्य निर्वासनं ब्राह्मणस्यैव ॥ ९.१२४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

123	But a just king shall fine and banish (men of) the three (lower) castes (varna) who have given false evidence, but a Brahmana he shall (only) banish.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/124_dasha_sthAnAni.md">
<details open><summary><h3>124 दश स्थानानि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

दश स्थानानि दण्डस्य  
मनुः स्वयंभुवो ऽब्रवीत् ।  
त्रिषु वर्णेषु यानि स्युर्  
अक्षतो ब्राह्मणो व्रजेत्  ॥ ८.१२४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/124_dasha_sthAnAni.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Manu Svāyambhuva has named ten places for punishment, where it should be inflicted in the case of the three castes; but the Brāhmaṇa shall depart unscathed.—(124)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**स्थान**शब्दो विषयपर्यायः । एतैः प्रदेशैः पीडयितव्यः प्रयपराधम्[^१४४] । शब्देन ब्राह्मणस्य धनदण्डविधानाद् **अक्षत**त्वोपदेशः शरीरपीडापरिहारार्थः कल्पते, सत्य् अपि धनस्य दशसंख्यानर्भावे । 


[^१४४]:
     M G DK (1: 577): prayaparādha-

वयं तु ब्रूमः "समग्रधनम् अक्षतम्" (म्ध् ८.३८०) इत्य् अत्र धनपीडापि निषिद्धैव ब्राह्मणस्य । तस्माद् यः सकृत् कथंचिद् अपराद्धः श्रुतशीलाभिजनयुक्तस् तस्य धनदण्डो ऽपि नास्ति । तथा च गौतमस् तादृशम् एव ब्राह्मणम् अधिकृत्य "द्वौ लोके धृतव्रतौ"[^१४५] (ग्ध् ८.१) इत्य् उपक्रम्य, "षड्भिः परिहार्यश् च" (ग्ध् ८.१२) इत्यादि ॥ ८.१२४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*sthāna*’ ‘*place*,’ is synonymous with ‘subject’; the meaning
being that the man should be made to suffer pain on these spots.

In as much as for the Brāhmaṇa also pecuniary punishment has been
directly prescribed, it follows that what is said here in regard to his
departing ‘unscathed’ is with reference to corporal punishment, which is
forbidden in his case; even though ‘property’ also is included (in the
next verse) among the ‘ten places.’

Our opinion however is that, in as much as one can be called
‘*unscathed*’ only when he has all his property also intact, *pecuniary*
punishment also must be taken as forbidden in the case of the Brāhmaṇa;
hence if a Brāhmaṇa, endowed with learning, character and noble birth,
should, by chance, happen to commit a crime, there is no pecuniary
punishment either. In fact, it is in reference to such a Brāhmaṇa that
Gautama, having begun with the statement—‘In this world there are two
men firm in their vow,’ (8.1)—goes on to say,—‘He should be excused from
six.’ (8.13).—(124)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.26), as laying down the forms of
‘death,’ which means ‘corporal punishment;’ *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds that
‘*vrajet*’ means ‘should go away from home or from the city’;—in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 630), which explains ‘*akṣataḥ*’ as ‘without
corporal suffering’;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 293), as laying
down the spots of the body where corporal punishment is to be inflicted
upon all offenders, except the Brāhmaṇa;—and in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Ācāra, p. 399 and Vyavahāra, p. 155), as laying down the ten forms of
corporal punishment.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.124-125)  
**

*Gautama* (12.46-47).—‘Corporal punishment must not be inflicted on the
Brāhmaṇa.—Desisting from the deed, publicly proclaiming his crime,
banishment and branding are the punishments to which a Brāhmaṇa may be
subjected.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.1-8).—‘Great criminals should all be put to death. In the
case of the Brāhmaṇa no corporal punishment should be inflicted. A.
Brāhmaṇa should be banished from his own country, his body having been
branded;—for murdering another Brāhmaṇa, let the figure of a headless
body be branded on his forehead; for drinking spirits, the flag of a
wine-seller; for stealing gold, a dog’s foot; for incest, a female
part;—if he has committed any other capital offence, he shall be
banished, taking with him all his property, and unhurt.’

*Nārada* (114.8-10).—‘For a crime of violence of the highest degree, a
fine amounting to no less than a thousand *Paṇas* has been ordained.
Moreover, corporal punishment, confiscation of the entire property,
banishment from the town, branding, as well as amputation of the limb,
is declared to be the punishment for a violent crime of the highest
degree. This gradation of punishments has been ordained for all castes
indiscriminately, excepting only corporal punishment in the case of a
Brāhmaṇa, who should never he subjected to corporal punishment. Shaving
his head, banishing him from the town, branding him on the forehead with
a mark of the crime of which he has been convicted, and parading him on
an ass, shall he the Brāhmaṇa’s punishment.’

Do. (15-16.20).—‘The Brāhmaṇa and the King are exempt from censure and
corporal punishment.’

Do. (15-16.22-31).—‘If a Śūdra insults a member of a higher caste with
invectives, he shall have his tongue cut out; if he refers to their name
or caste contemptuously, an iron-rod ten inches long shall be thrust
red-hot into his mouth;—if ho is insolent enough to teach duty to a
Brāhmaṇa, the King shall have hot oil poured into his mouth and ears.
With whatever limb a low caste man offends against a Brāhmaṇa, that very
limb of his shall be cut off; such shall be the atonement for his crime.
If a low-born man tries to place himself on the same seat as his
superior, he shall be branded on his hip and banished; or he may have
his backside gashed. If, through arrogance, he spits on his superior,
the King shall have both his lips cut off; if he urinates on him, then
his penis; if he breaks wind against him, the buttocks. If he pulls his
superior by the hair, he shall have his hands cut off; likewise if he
seizes him by the feet, beard, neck or scrotum. If a man censures a King
who is devoted to the discharge of his duties, he shall have his tongue
cut out, or his entire property confiscated. When an evil-minded person
assails even a wicked king, he shall be fastened on a stake and burnt in
fire.’

*Nārada* (Punishments, 41-439).—‘Let him not on any account kill a
Brāhmaṇa, though convicted of all crimes; he may at pleasure cause him
to be banished; let the King take his entire wealth from him, or leave a
fourth part of it; for four offences of a Brāhmaṇa, branding has been
ordained.’

*Bṛhaspati* (21.8).—‘For killing, capital punishment.’

Do. (21.15).—‘If persons begotten in the inverse order of castes, and
members of the lowest caste, should insult a Brāhmaṇa, they shall be
corporally punished, and shall never be amerced in fine.’

Do. (22.10).—‘Judges passing an unjust sentence, those who take bribes,
and those who betray confidence,—all such shall be banished.’

Do. (22.17).—‘House-breakers shall be impaled on a stake, and highwaymen
shall be bound and hanged by the neck from a tree.’

Do. (22.20).—‘Stealers of grass deserve to have a hand cut off.’

*Nārada* (Punishments, 36-37).—‘Svāyambhuva Manu has declared ten spots
of punishment which should be selected in punishing the lower castes; a
Brāhmaṇa should remain uninjured always;—those places are the privy
parts, the belly, the tongue, the two hands, and fifthly, the two feet;
as well as the eye, the nose, the two ears, the property and the body.’

*Bṛhaspati* (27.9-10).—‘Both hands, both feet, the male organ, the eye,
the tongue, the ears, the nose, the neck, the half of the foot, the
thumb and the index finger, the forehead, the lips, the hind part and
the hips;—these fourteen spots of punishment have been indicated. For a
Brāhmaṇa, branding on the forehead is the only kind of punishment. A
Brāhmaṇa, though a mortal sinner, shall not suffer capital punishment;
the King shall banish him and cause him to be branded and shaved.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

शरीरस्थानानि दश दण्डस्य, तानि पुनः — ॥ ८.१२५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

124	Manu, the son of the Self-existent (Svayambhu), has named ten places on which punishment may be (made to fall) in the cases of the three (lower) castes (varna); but a Brahmana shall depart unhurt (from the country).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/125_upastham_udaram.md">
<details open><summary><h3>125 उपस्थम् उदरम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

उपस्थम् उदरं जिह्वा  
हस्तौ पादौ च पञ्चमम् ।  
चक्षुर् नासा च कर्णौ च  
धनं देहस् तथैव च  ॥ ८.१२५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/125_upastham_udaram.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

(1) The genital organ, (2) the stomach, (3) the tongue, (4) the hands, (5) the feet, (6) the eye, (7) the nose, (8) the ears, (9) the property and (10) the body.—(125)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**उपस्थं** प्रजनधर्मः स्त्रीपुंसयोः । उद्देशमात्रम् इदं विनियोगस् तूत्तरत्र भविष्यति । यत्र च दण्डविशेषो नाम्नातस् तत्र यो येनैवाङ्गेनापराद्धः स तत्रैव पीडयितव्यः । तत्रागम्यागमन **उपस्थ**निग्रहः । चौर्य **उदरत** आहारनिवृत्त्यादिना । वाग्दण्डपारुष्ये **जिह्वाहस्तयोः** । पादबलेन व्यतिक्रामन् **पादयोः** । विवृत्य विश्रब्धं राजदारान् विक्ष्यमाणश् **चक्षुषोः** । अनुलेपनगन्धम् आजिघ्रन् **नासिकायाम्** । रहसि राजानम् मन्त्रयमाणं कुड्यपटान्तरित उपशृण्वन् **कर्णयोः** । **धने** प्रसिद्धो दण्डः । **देहे** मारणं महापातकिनः ॥ ८.१२५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*The genital organ*’—male and female. Here the places are only named;
the exact form in which the punishment is to be inflicted on each
‘place’ shall be described later on. If, with reference to any ‘place,’
no particular form of punishment has been prescribed, the law is that
the culprit shall suffer by that limb whereby he may have committed the
wrong. Hence in cases of incest, punishment is inflicted on the genital
organ;—in theft it is inflicted upon the stomach, in the form of
starvation, etc.;—in the case of defamation, on the tongue, and in that
of assault, on the hands;—when he trespasses with his feet, it is to be
inflicted on the feet;—if he openly and fearlessly stares at the king’s
wife, his punishment is inflicted on the eyes,—by smelling the
(forbidden) odour of sandal-paint, he is punished on the nose;—if he
should be found listening behind the wall or the curtain, while the king
is holding secret council, the punishment should fall on his
ears;—punishment regarding ‘*property*’ is well known;—the killing of
the ‘*body*’ is done only in the case of the gravest offenders.—(125)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 156);—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 399);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 630), which
adds that this should not be taken to be an exhaustive list;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti. p. 293), which adds that the punishment
should be inflicted upon that part of the body by which the crime might
have been committed.

It has been quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.26), which makes the remark that
has been reproduced in *Vīramitrodaya*; —*Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the
following notes:—‘*Dhana*’ is mentioned among the ‘sthānas’ with a view
to indicate that when the crime committed pertains to wealth, the
punishment also should pertain to that only; or it may be that the
punishment here meant is different from ‘fine’ (which is what has gone
before), and may be taken to stand for that physical pain which is
caused by the confiscation of some property; in the crime of adultery
the punishment should fall on the sexual organ,—in that of eating
improper food, on the stomach, such as starvation and so forth,—in
defamation, on the tongue, such as cutting it off,—in theft, on the
hands,—in misbehaviour with the feet, such as walking ahead of a
superior person, on the feet,—in trying to look at the king’s harem, on
the eyes,—in stealthily smelling his scents, on the nose,—in
eaves-dropping on the king’s councils, on the ears,—in the case of
heinous crimes, on the body, *i.e*., death.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.124-125)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.124].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

कामापराध उपस्थमात्रे दण्डं पातयेत् । न तद्व्यतिरिक्ते ऽन्यस्मिन् अङ्गे ताडनादि कुर्यात् । अन्नदोषे चोदरदण्ड आहारप्रतिषेधः । आक्रोशापराधे च जिह्वाश्रयम् । ताडने च हस्ताश्रयम् । पादापराधे च पादगतम् । चक्षुरपराधे च तदाश्रयः । एवं नासिकायां कर्णे च, धनापहारे च धनाश्रयम्, शरीरगते च पाटनं स्वशरीरगतं वैनयिकं कुर्यात् । तस्य त्व् अन्यद् वक्ष्यति- "येन येन यथाङ्गेन" इति । धनहरणं चात्र निक्षेपादिविषयं द्रष्टव्यम् । यतो न पौनरुक्त्यम्, चोरदण्डेन । दण्ड्येष्व् अपि च न दण्डमूलहरं पातयेत्, किं तर्हि — ॥ ८.१२६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

125	(These are) the organ, the belly, the tongue, the two hands, and fifthly the two feet, the eye, the nose, the two ears, likewise the (whole) body.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/126_anubandham_parijnAya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>126 अनुबन्धम् परिज्ञाय ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अनुबन्धं परिज्ञाय  
देश-कालौ च तत्त्वतः ।  
सारापराधो चालोक्य  
दण्डं दण्ड्येषु पातयेत्  ॥ ८.१२६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/126_anubandham_parijnAya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having duly ascertained the motive and the time and place, and having taken into consideration the condition (of the accused) and the nature of the offence,—he shall inflict punishment upon those deserving punishment.—(126)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तानुक्तदण्ड्येष्व् अपराधेषु मातृकाश्लोको ऽयम् । एतदर्थानुसारणेन सर्वत्र दण्डकॢप्तिः कर्तव्या । तत्र पौनःपुन्येन प्रवृत्तिर् **अनुबन्धः**, प्रवृत्तिकरणं वा, अनुबध्यते प्रयुज्यते येन तस्मिन् कर्मणि । तं **परिज्ञाय** । किम् अयम् आत्मकुटुम्बक्षुदवसायेन[^१४६] धर्मतन्त्रप्रसङ्गेन[^१४७] वा, अथ मद्यद्यूतादिशौण्डतया, तथा प्रमादाद् बुद्धिपूर्वं वा परप्रयुक्तः[^१४८] स्वेच्छया वेत्यादिर् **अनुबन्धः** । **देशो** ग्रामारण्यगृहजलजन्मप्रसवभूम्यादिः[^१४९] । **कालो** नक्तं दिवादिः सुभिक्षदुर्भिक्षबाल्ययौवनादिर् वा[^१५०] । **सारः** शक्त्यशक्ती आढ्यत्वदारिद्र्ये । **अपराधो** ऽष्टादशानां पदानाम् अन्यतमः । एतत् सर्वं पौर्वापर्येण निरूप्य तथा **दण्डं पातयेत्** कुर्याद् यथा स्थितिः सांसारिकी न भ्रश्यतीति ॥ ८.१२६ ॥


[^१५०]:
     M G DK (1:576) omit: vā


[^१४९]:
     M G: -graha-


[^१४८]:
     M G J: paraprayukta-


[^१४७]:
     M G DK (1:576): -tantrasaṅgena


[^१४६]:
     MD (4:1971; but not 1: 576): -avasādena
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse forms the basis for all penalties and offences, described
above; and it is in accordance with this that all punishment is to be
determined.

‘*Motive*,’ ‘*anubandha*,’ literally means *repealed action* or *that
which leads to repeated action*; the meaning thus is that the king shall
ascertain what it was that led the man to commit the offence, *i.e*., he
shall find out if he was urged to it by the starving condition of his
family, or by association with criminals, or by reason of his being
addicted to drink and gambling,—and if he did it intentionally or by
mistake,—if he was urged to it by another person, or he did it
voluntarily. These are the points to be considered in the ascertaining
of the man’s ‘*motive*.’

‘*Place*,’—a village, forest, granary or pasture-ground.

‘*Time*’—whether it was night or day; whether it was a time of scarcity
or of plenty; whether the criminal is a youth or a full-grown person.

‘*Condition*,’—capability or otherwise to suffer the penalty,—whether he
is rich or poor.

^(‘)*Offence*’—under which of the eighteen categories the act falls.

Having, in due order, considered all this, the king shall ‘*inflict the
punishment*,’—so that the condition of the society may not suffer.—(126)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Anubandham*’—‘Motive or frequency’ (Medhātithi and
Govindarāja)—‘frequency’ (Kullūka and Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Sārāprādhau*’—Nandana reading ‘*Sārāsārau*,’ explains it as ‘strength
or weakness of the offender.’

Tins verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 627), which explains
‘*Sāra*’ as *strength* and ‘*anubandha*’ as ‘repetition of the improper
act.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (12.51).—‘The award of punishment must be regulated by a
consideration of the status of the criminal, of his bodily strength, of
the nature of the crime, and whether the offence has been repeated.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.367).—‘On those deserving punishment, the King shall
inflict punishment after having considered the nature of the crime, the
time, place and strength of the criminal, as also his age, conduct and
wealth.’

*Nārada* (Punishments, 38).—‘After carefully considering the nature of
the offence, the place and time, and after examining the ability of the
offender, and his motive, he shall inflict the punishments.’

*Bṛhaspati* (27.4-7).—‘When he has discovered a man to be an offender,
the King should inflict on him, reprimand, reproach or corporal
chastisement, or one of the four grades of fines. He shall inflict
gentle reprimand when the offence is very light; harsh reproach for a
crime of the first degree; a fine for a crime of the middlemost degree,
and arrest in the case of high treason. Banishment also may be resorted
to by a king desirous of promoting his own welfare;...... and all the
various forms of punishment should be combined in the case of one who
has committed a mortal sin. The King should punish elders, domestic
priests and persons commanding respect, with admonition only; other
litigants he should punish with fine, when they are found guilty; and on
the perpetrators of a heavy crime, he should inflict corporal
punishment.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**अनुबन्धं परिज्ञायेति** । केचित् अत्र व्यतिक्रमानुष्ठानस्य पौनःपुन्यं क्रियानुष्ठानाभ्यासलक्षणम् आहुः । वयं पुनर् **अनुबन्धम्** अपराधकारणम् आचक्ष्महे । कथम् अनुबध्यते ऽनेनेत्य् **अनुबन्धो**, लोभादिपदार्थः । किं तत्, अपराधश् चौर्यादिः । तं परिज्ञाय किम् अयं चौर्यादिर् अपराधो ऽस्य् कामात् उत क्रोधात् अथ लोभान् मोहाद् वा । अथात्मकुटुम्बस्थित्यै धर्मतन्त्रानुग्रहाय वेत्य् एवम् । अस्य चापराधहेतोर् अनुबन्धस्व विज्ञाने प्रयोजनम्, तद्भेदाद् दण्डविशेषो यथा स्याद् इति । देशकालौ च तत्त्वतः परिज्ञायेति वर्तते । तत्र गृहरथ्याखलक्षेत्रस्वविषयपरविषयादिनिर्देशो ऽपराधे ऽपेक्षितव्यः । क्वायम् अपराधः तथा कालः, सुभिक्षदुर्भिक्षाकुलानाकुलवयोऽवस्थादिः । सारं चापराधस्य द्रव्याद्भिजनादिः, तद्विपर्ययं चासारं निदर्शनार्थत्वात् सारग्रहणस्य । अपराधं चावेक्ष्य गुरुलघुत्वेन ज्ञानाज्ञानकृतं वस्त्रहिरण्यादिकृतं वा दण्डं दण्ड्येषु पातयेत् देशादीन् अवेक्ष्य, यस्माद् अन्यथा हि तस्य — ॥ ८.१२७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

126	Let the (king), having fully ascertained the motive, the time and place (of the offence), and having considered the ability (of the criminal to suffer) and the (nature of the) crime, cause punishment to fall on those who deserve it.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/127_adharmadaNDanaM_loke.md">
<details open><summary><h3>127 अधर्मदण्डनं लोके ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अधर्मदण्डनं लोके  
यशोघ्नं कीर्तिनाशनम् ।  
अस्वर्ग्यं च परत्राऽपि  
तस्मात् तत् परिवर्जयेत्  ॥ ८.१२७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/127_adharmadaNDanaM_loke.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Unjust punishment is destructive of reputation among men and subversive of fame; in the other world also it leads to loss of heaven; he shall therefore avoid it.—(127)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अधर्मप्रधानदण्डनम्[^१५१] **अधर्मदण्डनम्**[^१५२] । पूर्वोक्तम् अनपेक्ष्येदं शास्त्रपाठमात्रेण[^१५३] राजेच्छया रागद्वेषादिभिर् वा । तद् यशोनाशकं कीर्तेश् च विच्छेदकम् । स्वदेशे गुणख्यातिर् **यशः,** देशान्तरे **कीर्तिः** । जीवतो वा पुण्यशब्दो **यशः**, उत्तरकालिकी **कीर्तिः** । निर्दोषगुणवती **कीर्तियशसी** । अन्यो वा भेद उन्नेयः, अर्थवादत्वात् । **अस्वर्ग्यं** स्वर्गप्राप्तौ कर्मान्तरजन्यायां प्रतिबन्धकम् । **परत्रापी**ति श्लोकपूरणार्थम्, स्वर्गस्यामुष्मिकत्वात्[^१५४] ॥ ८.१२७ ॥


[^१५४]:
     M G omit: uttarakālikī kīrtiḥ . . . svargasyāmuṣmikatvāt


[^१५३]:
     DK (1:576; 4: 1972) : anapekṣya daṇḍaśāstrapāṭhamātreṇa


[^१५२]:
     M G DK (1:576) omit: adhamadaṇḍaṇam, and add ca


[^१५१]:
     DK (4: 1972; but not 1: 576): adharmapradhānaṃ daṇḍanam; M G J: -daṇḍam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Unfair punishment*’ is that punishment, that savours strongly of
injustice;—*i.e*., one that takes no account of what has been just said,
and which is determined cither entirely on the basis of the letter of
the law, or by the king’s whim, or by love, hatred and such other
feelings.

Such a punishment is ‘*destructive of reputation*,’ also ‘*subversive of
fame*’; ‘reputation’ consists in the man’s good qualities being known in
his own country, while ‘fame’ in their being known in foreign countries.
Or ‘reputation’ may consist in one’s good name during life.—Or the
passage being a purely commendatory one, some other distinction may be
drawn.

‘*Leads to loss of heaven*’;—*i.e*., obstructs the passage to heaven,
that might have been opened by other meritorious deeds.

‘*In the other world*’;—this has been added for filling up the metre;
‘heaven’ itself being the other world.—(127)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 649).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.127-128)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha* (19.42-45).—‘If an innocent person is punished, the domestic
priest shall perform a *Kṛcchra* penance; and the King shall fast during
three days and nights.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.356, 358).—‘Punishment illegally inflicted by the King
destroys heaven, fame and worldly prosperity; legally inflicted, it
brings to the King heaven, fame and victory. If the King punishes those
who deserve punishment, and if he kills those who deserve to be killed,
he offers, thereby, sacrifices at which excellent sacrificial fees are
given.’

*Nārada* (Punishments, 61).—‘Let the King, faithful to the tenets of the
sacred law, practise the duties of his office and follow the rule of
inflicting punishment. Let him destroy, as governor, the evil-doers,
after having traced them by cunning stratagems and arrested them.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 649).—‘By not chastising evil-doers,
and by punishing those who are already submissive, kings and ministers
incur sin.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

देशाद्यपेक्षया दण्डं विदध्याद् यत्नतः । एवं च सति तस्यायं प्रयोगक्रमविधिः शिष्यते ॥ ८.१२८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

127	Unjust punishment destroys reputation among men, and fame (after death), and causes even in the next world the loss of heaven; let him, therefore, beware of (inflicting) it.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/128_adaNDyAn_daNDayan.md">
<details open><summary><h3>128 अदण्ड्यान् दण्डयन् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अदण्ड्यान् दण्डयन् राजा  
दण्ड्यांश् चैवाऽप्य् अदण्डयन् ।  
अयशो महद् आप्नोति  
नरकं चैव गच्छति  ॥ ८.१२८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/128_adaNDyAn_daNDayan.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king, punishing those who do not deserve to be punished, and not punishing those who deserve to be punished, attains great ill-fame and goes to hell.—(128)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वश्लोके ऽनुबन्धादिनिरूपणविधिविशेषः[^१५५] । अनेन त्व् अनपराधानां दण्डनं प्रतिषिध्यते सापराधानां च विधीयते । वृत्त्यर्थतां[^१५६] दण्डस्य मन्यमानो ऽनुग्रहेण मा हासीद् इति[^१५७] ॥ ८.१२८ ॥


[^१५७]:
     J: 'nugraheṇāhāsīd iti (ayaśaḥ); the reading here appears to have been corrupted.


[^१५६]:
     DK (1: 576, not 4: 1972): vṛttyarthatāṃ


[^१५५]:
     M G: -ādīni nirūpaṇavidhiviśeṣaḥ; DK (1: 576, not 4: 1972): ādinirūpaṇavidheḥ śeṣaḥ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The preceding verse was supplementary to the injunction regarding the
consideration of the ‘motive’ and other things; while the present verse
*prohibits* the punishing of persons who are not guilty of any offence,
and enjoins that of those who are guilty;—and this is emphasised because
of the possibility of the king regarding punishment as futile and hence
omitting to inflict it, which would lead to much evil.—(128)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 649);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Ācāra, p. 391), as prohibiting the punishment of the innocent;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 25);—in *Mitākṣarā* (2.1), to the
effect that the non-investigation of cases as well as the wrong
investigation of them,—both bring sin upon the king;—in *Nītimayūkha*
(p. 59);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 5a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.127-128)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.127].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

128	A king who punishes those who do not deserve it, and punishes not those who deserve it, brings great infamy on himself and (after death) sinks into hell.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/129_vAgdaNDam_prathamam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>129 वाग्दण्डम् प्रथमम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वाग्दण्डं प्रथमं कुर्याद्  
धिग्दण्डं तदनन्तरम् ।  
तृतीयं धनदण्डं तु  
वधदण्डम् अतः परम्  ॥ ८.१२९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/129_vAgdaNDam_prathamam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

First of all, he shall inflict punishment in the form of reprimand, then in the form of reproach, thirdly in the form of fine, and after that the death-penalty.—(129)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यो गुणवान् ईषत्प्रथमम् एवापराद्धः स वाचा निर्भर्त्स्यते "न साधु कृतवान् असि, मा पुनर् एवं कार्षीः" इति । तथा विनीयमाने यदि न निवर्तते, "को ऽत्र दोषः"[^१५८] इति वा प्रतिजानीयात् तदा धिग्धिगादिशब्दैः परुषवचनैः कुत्सार्थैः क्षिप्यते । ततो ऽप्य् अनिवर्तमानो यथाशास्त्रं धनेन दण्डनीयः । तद् अप्य् अगणयन्न् ऐश्वर्यादिना हन्तव्यः । वधदण्डश् च ताडनाङ्गच्छेदादि, न मरणम् एव ॥ ८.१२९ ॥


[^१५८]:
     M G: kāryadoṣa

_यत आह ।_
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If the guilty person is a good man and has committed a slight offence,
and for the first time, then he is only reprimanded: ‘you have not acted
well, do not do it again.’

If, on being thus reprimanded, the man does not desist, or goes on to
say ‘what is there wrong in this?’—then he is rebuked with such harsh
reproachful words as ‘fie,’ ‘shame’ and so forth.

If he does not desist even when thus rebuked, he should be punished with
fine, in accordance with the Law.

If he does not mind the fine either through folly or pride of
wealth,—then he should be killed. This ‘*death-penalty*’ consists in the
cutting off of certain limbs, etc., and not necessarily in actually
killing the man; as is clear from what follows in the next verse.—(129)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (1.366), which, in quoting it,
transposes, ‘*vāgdaṇḍam*’ and ‘*dhigdaṇḍam*,’—such reading is more in
keeping with Yājñvalkya’s text (1.356),—and it explains ‘*dhigdaṇḍa*’ as
addressing such terms as ‘fie upon thee,’—and ‘*vāgdaṇḍa*’ as
‘pronouncing a terrible curse

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 156); as laying down
the order of sequence among the various forms of punishment; it explains
*vāgdaṇḍa* as pronouncing a terrible curse (reproducing the exact words
of Mitākṣarā) and ‘*dhigdaṇḍa*’ as ‘chiding with such words as *fie* and
the like.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 630), which adds the following
notes:—‘*vāgdaṇḍa*’, ‘thou hast not done right,’—‘*dhigdaṇḍa*’, ‘fie
upon thee, damned sinner.’

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 273), which adds the
following notes:—The first two forms of punishment are meant for light
offences; ‘*vadhadaṇḍa*’ means *corporal punishment*, which has to be
inflicted upon all except the Brāhmaṇas.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.129-130)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (1.366).—‘Punishment in the form of Reproach, (2) in the
form of Reprimand and (3) in the form of Fine,—shall be inflicted either
severally or collectively, in accordance with the nature of the
offence.’

*Bṛhaspati* (27.4-5).—(See under 120.)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अपराधापेक्षैषा दण्डप्रकॢप्तिः क्रमेण स्यात् । वधश् चात्र ताडने न तु मारणे, सामर्थ्यात् । तथा च दर्शयति — ॥ ८.१२९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

129	Let him punish first by (gentle) admonition, afterwards by (harsh) reproof, thirdly by a fine, after that by corporal chastisement.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/130_vadhenA-pi_yadA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>130 वधेनाऽपि यदा ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वधेनाऽपि यदा त्व् एतान्  
निग्रहीतुं न शक्नुयात् ।  
तदैषु सर्वम् अप्य् एतत्  
प्रयुञ्जीत चतुष्टयम्  ॥ ८.१३० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/130_vadhenA-pi_yadA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When however he is not able to restrain them even by the ‘death-penalty,’—then he should inflict on them all these four.—(130)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

मारणं चेद् वधः किं तद् अन्यद् येन[^१५९] शक्यते । कथं चैनं[^१६०] पापं निगृह्णीतेत्यादिपरुषवाक्यपूर्वं दुर्विनीतेषु धनदण्डवधौ समुच्चेतव्यौ । कृते ऽपि शरीरदण्डे यदि नावतिष्ठते ततो न कृतनिग्रह इत्य् उत्सृजेद् अपि तु स वधदण्डः कर्तव्यः । धनवधदण्डयोश् च पुनःप्रवृत्त्यर्थो ऽयम् आरम्भः । वाग्दण्डे[^१६१] मृदुत्वात् कः पृच्छति । धनेन च निगृहीतस्य[^१६२] पुनर् वधो दृष्टो "अङ्गुलीर्[^१६३] ग्रन्थिभेदस्य" (म्ध् ९.२७७) इति ॥ ८.१३० ॥


[^१६३]:
     M G J: aṅguli-


[^१६२]:
     M G: gṛhītasya


[^१६१]:
     M G DK (1:576) : vāgdaṇḍadhigdaṇḍau


[^१६०]:
     DK (1: 576): kathaṃ canainaṃ


[^१५९]:
     M G J: yan na
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If actual killing were meant by ‘death-penalty,’ then what would be
there that could not be done by it? How too would the penalty not
restrain a crime?

On persons not resuming good behaviour after being rebuked, ‘—fine’ and
the ‘death-penalty,’ *i. e*., corporal punishment, should be conjointly
inflicted. If, even after corporal punishment, the man does not desist,
the king shall not ignore him,—under the impression that he has already
inflicted the legal punishment,—but he shall inflict actual
‘death-penalty.’

The present verse has been added with a view to indicate that the matter
of *fines* and *death-penalty* is going to be taken up again later on.

As regards verbal punishment, it being too gentle, who would mind it? If
the man has been punished with a fine, and even then does not desist,
the ‘death-penalty’ shall be inflicted in the form of *the cutting off
of the fingers* and so forth, as described below under 9.277.—(130)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 630), which explains
*vadhena* as ‘beating;’—and in *Vyavahāra Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 111).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.129-130)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.129].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **वधेनापि यदा त्व् एतान् निग्रहीतुं न शक्नुयात् ।**

अविनेयत्वाद् एतेषाम् —

> **तदैषु सर्वम् अप्य् एतत् प्रयुञ्जीत चतुष्टयम् ॥**

कृते ऽपि शारीरे दण्डे यदि नोपतिष्ठेतापराधात्, ततो ऽस्य वाग्दण्डादिचतुष्टयं समस्तं क्रियते, न पुनर् अपराधी कृतनिग्रह इत्य् उत्सृज्येत् व्यवस्थार्थं लोकस्य । इतरथा मात्स्यन्यायः स्यात् । धनदण्डर्थश् चायं पुनरारम्भः । वाग्दण्डदिघ्दण्डौ तु मृदुत्वात् कः प्रयच्छतीति । तथा च प्रकरणान्तरे इमम् एव क्रमं वक्षय्ति । "अङ्गुलीर् ग्रन्थिभेदस्य छेदयेन् प्रथमे ग्रहे द्वितीये हस्तचरणौ तृतीये वधम् अर्हति" ॥ ८.१३० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

130	But when he cannot restrain such (offenders) even by corporal punishment, then let him apply to them even all the four (modes cojointly).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/131_lokasaMvyavahArArthaM_yAH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>131 लोकसंव्यवहारार्थं याः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

लोकसंव्यवहारार्थं  
याः संज्ञाः प्रथिता भुवि ।  
ताम्र-रूप्य-सुवर्णानां  
ताः प्रवक्ष्याम्य् अशेषतः  ॥ ८.१३१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/131_lokasaMvyavahArArthaM_yAH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

I am going to describe fully, for the sake of business-transactions, those technical terms that are used in the world in connection with silver and gold.—(131)


‘The dust-mote discernible in the sunbeam passing through a lattice is called Trasareṇu;— 
three Trasareṇus make one nit; 
3 nits make 1 Black mustard-seed. 
3 Black mustard seeds make 1 white mustard seed. 
6 white mustard seeds make 1 Barley-corn. 
3 Barley-corns make 1 Kṛṣṇala. 
5 Kṛṣṇalas make 1 Māṣa. 
12 Māṣas make ½ Akṣa. 
½ Akṣa plus 4 Māṣas make 1 Suvarṇa. 
4 Suvarṇas make 1 Niṣka. 
2 Kṛṣṇalas make 1 Silver Māṣaka. 
16 Silver-Māṣakas make 1 Dharaṇa of silver. 
1 Karṣa or 80 Raktikas of copper make 1 Kārṣāpaṇa. 
250 Copper Paṇas make the first or lowest amercement. 
500 Copper Paṇas make the middlemost amercement. 
1,000 Copper Paṇas make the Highest amercement.


‘One Dust-mote in the Sun’s beam makes 1 Trasareṇu, 
8 Trasareṇus make 1 Likṣā, 
3 Likṣās make 1 Rājasarṣapa (black mustard seed), 
3 Black mustard seed make 1 White mustard seed, 
6 White mustard seeds make 1 Barley-corn, 
3 Barley-corns make 1 Kṛṣṇala, 
5 Kṛṣṇalas make 1 Māṣa, 
16 Māṣas make 1 Suvarṇa, 
4 or 5 Suvarṇas make 1 Pala, 
2 Kṛṣṇalas make 1 Māṣa (silver), 
16 Māṣas (silver) make 1 Dharaṇa, 
10 Dharaṇas make 1 Śatamāna or Pala (silver), 
4 Suvarṇas make 1 Niṣka, 
Copper, ¼ Pala (gold) in weight make 1 Paṇa (copper), 
1080 Paṇas make the highest amercement, 
540 Paṇas make the middlemost amercement, 
270 Paṇas make the lowest amercement.’


‘10 Dhānya-māṣaka or 5 Guñjās = 1 Suvarṇa-māṣaka.
16 Suvarṇa-māṣakas = 1 Suvarṇa or 1 Karṣa. 
4 Karṣas = 1 Pala.
80 white mustard seeds = 1 Māṣaka (silver). 
16 Māṣaka (silver) or 20 Śambya berries = 1 Dharaṇa. 
20 Rice-grains = 1 Dharaṇa (Diamond).
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**ताम्रा**दीनां लिक्षादयः **संज्ञा भुवि** प्रसिद्धाः । किं शास्त्रपरिभाषया । तत्र वृद्धव्यवहारो गवादिशब्दवद् इति । अत आह **लोकसंव्यवहारार्थम्** । **अर्थ**शब्दो विषयवचनः । तेन व्यवहारप्रसिद्धिर् आश्रिता भवति । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ततश् च गवादिशब्दतुल्यतया व्यवहारात् प्रसिद्धः । किं शास्त्रोपदेशेन । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;उच्यते । नियमार्थ उपदेशः । अन्येषाम् अपि परिमेयानाम् अयस्कांस्यसुवर्णादीनाम् एताः संज्ञाः सन्ति, तन्निवृत्त्यर्थः । क्वचिद् देशे परिमाणे भेदो ऽप्य् अस्ति, तन्निवृत्त्यर्थश् च । क्वचित् संबन्धतया नियम्यते । तथा च क्वचिद् अष्टाचत्वारिंशता माषबन्धं क्वचिच् चतुःषष्ट्या क्वचित् साष्टेन शतेन । तद् एतत् सर्वं नियम्यते । 

अथ चैवं संबन्धः क्रियते । **याः संज्ञा भुवि प्रथितास् ता लोकसंव्यवहारार्थं वक्ष्यामि** । सर्वस्य लोकस्याभिर् एव संव्यवहारो यथा स्याद् दण्डादिनियोगस्याप्य् अन्यथा प्रसिद्धिः ॥ ८.१३१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

*Objection*.—“Such terms as ‘*likṣā*’ (Louse-egg) and the rest,
pertaining to copper and other metals are already well known in the
world; what is the use of propounding a scriptural definition? They
could he learnt from the usage of experienced men, just as the exact
denotation of such words as ‘cow’ and the like is learnt.”

It is in view of this objection that the author has added the phrase
‘*for the sake of business-transactions*’; ‘sake’ here denotes *sphere*;
hence the meaning is that what is adopted as the basis here is usage in
actual business (and not ordinary usage).

“In that case, standing on the same footing as such words as ‘cow’ and
the like, they would he learnt from actual business-usage; what is the
use of setting forth a scriptural injunction?”

The answer to this is that the Injunction is put forth for the purposes
of restriction. There being several other such terms in use in
connection with iron, bell-metal, gold and other metals, it is with a
view to preclude these that the author has laid down the present
injunction; as also for precluding the difference in the measures, which
is met with in certain localities. For instance, in some localities, a
*pala* is regarded as made of 40 *māṣas*, while in others of 64, and in
others again of 108, and so forth. And all this diversity is precluded
and one definite measure is laid down here.

The verse is to be construed as follows—‘*these terms that are used in
the world, I am going to describe for the sake of
business-transactions*,’—so that the business-transactions of all men
may be carried on with the help of those same technical terms; and
incidentally the rules relating to these also would become
clearer.—(131)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 115);—in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 665), which explains the construction as ‘those
that are generally used, these I am going to describe, explain, for the
purpose of transactions among men’;—in *Hemādri* (Vrata, p. 53);—and in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Dāna, p. 4a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.131-137)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (4.1-13).—

> ‘The dust-mote discernible in the sunbeam passing through a lattice is
> called *Trasareṇu*;—  
> three *Trasareṇus* make one *nit*;  
> 3 *nits* make 1 Black mustard-seed.  
> 3 Black mustard seeds make 1 *white* mustard seed.  
> 6 white mustard seeds make 1 Barley-corn.  
> 3 Barley-corns make 1 *Kṛṣṇala*.  
> 5 *Kṛṣṇalas* make 1 *Māṣa*.  
> 12 *Māṣas* make ½ *Akṣa*.  
> ½ *Akṣa plus* 4 *Māṣas* make 1 *Suvarṇa*.  
> 4 *Suvarṇas* make 1 *Niṣka*.  
> 2 *Kṛṣṇalas* make 1 Silver Māṣaka.  
> 16 Silver-*Māṣakas* make 1 *Dharaṇa* of silver.  
> 1 *Karṣa* or 80 *Raktikas* of copper make 1 *Kārṣāpaṇa*.  
> 250 Copper *Paṇas* make the first or lowest amercement.  
> 500 Copper *Paṇas* make the middlemost amercement.  
> 1,000 Copper *Paṇas* make the Highest amercement.

*Yājñavalkya* (1.361-364).—

> ‘One Dust-mote in the Sun’s beam makes 1 *Trasareṇu*,  
> 8 *Trasareṇus* make 1 *Likṣā,*  
> 3 *Likṣās* make 1 *Rājasarṣapa* (black mustard seed),  
> 3 Black mustard seed make 1 White mustard seed,  
> 6 White mustard seeds make 1 Barley-corn,  
> 3 Barley-corns make 1 *Kṛṣṇala,*  
> 5 *Kṛṣṇalas* make 1 *Māṣa,*  
> 16 *Māṣas* make 1 *Suvarṇa,*  
> 4 or 5 *Suvarṇas* make 1 *Pala,*  
> 2 *Kṛṣṇalas* make 1 *Māṣa* (silver),  
> 16 *Māṣas* (silver) make 1 *Dharaṇa,*  
> 10 *Dharaṇas* make 1 *Śatamāna* or *Pala* (silver),  
> 4 *Suvarṇas* make 1 *Niṣka,*  
> Copper, ¼ Pala (gold) in weight make 1 *Paṇa* (copper),  
> 1080 Paṇas make the highest amercement,  
> 540 Paṇas make the middlemost amercement,  
> 270 Paṇas make the lowest amercement.’

*Nārada* (Punishments, 57 *et seq*.).—‘*Kārṣāpaṇa* is a silver-coin in
the Southern country; in the East it is equal to 20 *Paṇas*;—a *Māṣa* is
the twentieth part of a *Kārṣāpaṇa*;—a *Kākanī* is the fourth part of a
*Māṣa* or *Pala*;—a *Kārṣāpaṇa* is equal to an *Aṇḍikā*; four *Aṇḍikās*
make one *Dhānaka*; twelve *Dhānakas* make one *Suvarṇa*, otherwise
called *Dīnāra*.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 256).—

> ‘10 *Dhānya-māṣaka* or 5 Guñjās = 1 *Suvarṇa-māṣaka*.  
> 16 *Suvarṇa-māṣakas =* 1 *Suvarṇa* or 1 *Karṣa*.  
> 4 *Karṣas =* 1 *Pala*.  
> 80 white mustard seeds = 1 *Māṣaka* (silver).  
> 16 *Māṣaka* (silver) or 20 *Śambya berries* = 1 *Dharaṇa*.  
> 20 Rice-grains = 1 *Dharaṇa* (Diamond).

The weights are—½ *Māṣaka*, 1 *Māṣaka*, 2 *Māṣakas*, 4 *Māṣakas*, 8
*Māṣakas*, *Suvarṇa*, 2 *Suvarṇas*, 4 *Suvarṇas*, 8 *Suvarṇas*, 10
*Suvarṇas*, 20 *Suvarṇas*, 30 *Suvarṇas*, 40 *Suvarṇas*, 100
*Suvarṇas*.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Parāśaramādhava-Vyavahāra, p. 116).—‘Copper 1 *Karṣa* in
weight makes the coin called *Paṇa*, also called *Candrikā*;—4 *Paṇas*
make one *Dhānaka*;—12 *Dhānakas* make one *Suvarṇa*, also called
*Dīnāra*

*Vyāsa* (Do. p. 117).—‘Eight *Palas* make 1 *Suvarṇa*;—14 *Suvarṇas*
make one *Niṣka*.
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

विशिष्टजातिपरिमाणस्य द्रव्यस्य संज्ञार्थ उपदेशो दण्डविशेषार्थः ॥ ८.१३१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

131	Those technical names of (certain quantities of) copper, silver, and gold, which are generally used on earth for the purpose of business transactions among men, I will fully declare.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/132_jAlAntaragate_bhAnau.md">
<details open><summary><h3>132 जालान्तरगते भानौ ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

जालान्तरगते भानौ  
यत् सूक्ष्मं दृश्यते रजः ।  
प्रथमं तत् प्रमाणानां  
त्रसरेणुं प्रचक्षते  ॥ ८.१३२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/132_jAlAntaragate_bhAnau.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The small mote that is seen when the sun shines through a lattice-hole they declare to be the ‘triad,’ the very first of measures.—(132)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

इमं श्लोकं केचिन् नाधीयते, त्रसरेणौ विप्रतिपत्त्यभावात्[^१६४] । गवाक्षकुचिकाविवरप्रविष्टे सूर्ये यो रेणुर् दृश्यते स त्रसरेणुः । **अन्तर**शब्दो विवरपर्यायः । **प्रथमं तत्प्रमाणानाम्** इति ॥ ८.१३२ ॥


[^१६४]:
     M G DK (1: 528): vipratipattyā tāvad
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Some people do not read this verse as part of the text, on the ground
that there is no difference of opinion regarding the ‘Triad.’

When the sun shines through a window-hole or lattice, we see a particle
of dust; it is this that is called ‘Triad.’

‘*Antara*’ means *hole*.

‘*This is the very first of measures*’— (132)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The ‘*Trasareṇu*’, Triad,’ consists of three diads, each ‘diad’
consisting of two ‘*aṇus*’ or atoms.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 115);—in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 665);—in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 580); in *Hemādri*
(Vrata, p. 53);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Dāna, p. 4a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.131-137)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.131].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

132	The very small mote which is seen when the sun shines through a lattice, they declare (to be) the least of (all) quantities and (to be called) a trasarenu (a floating particle of dust).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/133_trasareNavo.aShTau.md">
<details open><summary><h3>133 त्रसरेणवो ऽष्टौ ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

त्रसरेणवो ऽष्टौ विज्ञेया  
लिक्षैका परिमाणतः ।  
ता राजसर्षपस् तिस्रस्  
ते त्रयो गौरसर्षपः  ॥ ८.१३३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/133_trasareNavo.aShTau.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Eight Triads should be known as one ‘Louse-egg’ in measure; three of these as one ‘Black Mustard’; and three of these latter as a ‘White Mustard.’—(133)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तत्रोपचितपरिमाणाः[^१६५] । न पुनर् अयं **लिक्षा**शब्दः स्वेदजक्षुद्रजन्तुवचनः । **तास् तिस्रो** **लिक्षा** एको **राजसर्षपा**ख्यपरिमाणपदार्थः । एवं योजनीयम् । ततश् च व्यभिचारयन्ति न यथोक्तपरिमाणा यवादयो ऽर्था इति ते निरस्ता भवन्ति । न हि यवादीनाम् अर्थानां परिमाणम् । कथं तर्हि यथोक्तपरिमाणार्थः[^१६६] । यथा चोपक्रान्तसंज्ञाः प्रवक्ष्यामि परिमाणम् इति । त्रसरेणुश् चार्थो नियतपरिमाणस् तेनैतत् सर्वं निश्चेयम् । शक्नुवन्ति च निपुणास् त्रसरेणून् संहन्तुम्[^१६७] इति नानारभ्यार्थोपदेशः । एतत् स्वर्णकाराभिमानसंख्यास्मृतिरूपं निर्बाधं भवति । तत एव वस्तु निपुणतो ऽशेषतो ऽवधारयितव्यम् ॥ ८.१३३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The gradually ascending measures are now described.

The term ‘*likṣā*,’ ‘*louse*’ does not stand for the sweat-born insect,
when it is said that ‘three Louse-eggs make one Black Mustard’; what is
meant is that the three of the measures known as the ‘Louse-egg’ make
one of that particular measure which is known as ‘Black Mustard.’ This
meets those objectors who argue that the ‘barley-grain,’ etc., that we
see are not found to be exactly of the same size as those described
here. Because the measure here described is not of the barley and other
*grains*; what is meant is that these terms constitute the names of
those particular measures. The subject has been introduced also with the
words—‘I am going to describe the *measures*.’

The ‘*Triad*’ is an object whose measure is fixed; and through this
Triad all the other measures are to be determined. Clever men are
capable of forming compounds of ‘Triads’; so that the text has not put
forward anything impossible or unknown. What is here described becomes
clear by referring to the opinions and ideas current among goldsmiths.
In fact the details of the subject can be ascertained only by referring
to them.—(133)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 666);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 115);—in *Hemādri* (Vrata, p. 53);—and in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Dāna 4a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.131-137)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.131].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

133	Know (that) eight trasarenus (are equal) in bulk (to) a liksha (the egg of a louse), three of those to one grain of black mustard (ragasarshapa), and three of the latter to a white mustard-seed.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/134_sarShapAH_ShaD.md">
<details open><summary><h3>134 सर्षपाः षड् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सर्षपाः षड् यवो मध्यस्  
त्रियवं त्व् एककृष्णलम् ।  
पञ्चकृष्णलको माषस्  
ते सुवर्णस् तु षोडश  ॥ ८.१३४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/134_sarShapAH_ShaD.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Six ‘mustards’ make one middling ‘barley-corn’; three of these make one ‘guñjā-berry’; a ‘bean’ is made of five ‘guñja-berries;’ and sixteen ‘beans’ make one ‘gold-piece.’—(131)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>
<u>मध्यमशब्दो</u> ऽभ्रान्तिहेतुः परिमाणपरत्वे नात्यन्तम् अपिचितो नातिस्थूलः सर्षपपरिमाण इति **मध्य**ग्रहणम् अर्थवत् । संज्ञापरत्वे तु न किंचिन् मध्यशब्देन[^१६८] यवशब्दसंज्ञात्वात् । 


[^१६८]:
     M G DK: madhyamaśabdena

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;तद् असत् । नायं संदर्भो येन प्रत्यवयवं प्रयोजनम् उच्यते । पद्यग्रन्थो ऽयम् । तत्र संगतार्थम्[^१६९] अपि वृत्तानुरोधात् किंचिद् उच्यते । अस्ति चास्यान्वयः । अनन्विताभिधानं हि वाक्यार्थविरोधान् न प्रमाणम् । न चावगताभिधानम् अपि । परिमाणभेदांस् त्रसरेणुशतमानादीन् आद्यन्तान् अपेक्ष्य मध्यपहितत्वान् मध्यो यवाख्यः परिमाणविशेषः । 


[^१६९]:
     M G DK: saṃgamanārtham

पञ्चकृष्णला अस्मिन् सन्ति **पञ्चकृष्णलिकः**[^१७०] । "अत इति ठनौ" इति टन् कर्तव्यः । "पञ्चकृष्णलकः" इति पाठे कबन्तो बहुव्रीहिः । ते कृष्णलाः षोडश एकः सुवर्णः ॥ ८.१३४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

“The term ‘*middling*’ is likely to lead to mistakes. If the names here
put forward are meant to be denotative of the size of the objects named,
then the addition of the epithet ‘middling’ has some meaning,—the sense
being that the size of the ‘Mustard’ here meant is that of a mustard
grain which is neither too large nor too small. If, on the other hand,
the terms are put forward as mere technical names, then there can be no
sense in the term ‘*middling*,’—the term ‘barleycorn’ being a mere
technical name (standing for the *grain*).”

This is not right. This is not a prose-treatise, that we should seek for
the justification of every expression used; it is a metrical treatise,
and as such sometimes even irrelevant expressions are introduced for the
purpose of filling up the metre. As a matter of fact, however, there is
some relevancy in the present case; if it were something wholly
irrelevant it would interfere with the comprehension of the sentence as
a whole, and would thereby vitiate its authority. But there is nothing
irrelevant here; the fact is that the ‘barley-corn’ being mentioned in
the *middle* of the entire table of measures—beginning with the ‘Triad’
and ending with the ‘*Śatamūna*,’—the epithet ‘*middling*’ has been
added to it in the sense that the particular measure known as the
‘barleycorn’ occurs in the *middle* of the whole table of measures.

The term ‘*pañcakṛṣṇalika*’ is formed with the ‘*ṭhin*’ affix, the sense
being ‘that which is made up of five ‘*Kṛṣṇalas*.’ If the reading is
‘*pañcakṛṣṇalika*,’ it should be treated as a *Bahuvrīhi* compound,
ending with the ‘*kap*’ affix.

Sixteen of these ‘*guñjā-berries*’ make one ‘gold-piece.’—(134)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The *Kṛṣṇala* is the same as the *Raktikā* (Vern. *Ratti*), equivalent
to 122 grammes or 1.875 grains.

“The tines in court were reckoned as so many *paṇas*, one *paṇa* being
the same as a *karṣa* = 16 *Māṣa* = 80 *Kṛṣṇala*. Some of the weights
mentioned are, confined to gold —*Suvarṇa* and *Niṣka*; some to silver
—*Purāṇa* and *Śatamāna*; and some are used for both—*kṛṣṇala, paṇa
māṣa, pala, dharaṇa*, the last at times of copper.”—Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 666) which explains
‘*madhyaḥ*’ as ‘neither large nor small’;—and in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 115), which adds that the name ‘*māṣa*’ is applied to the
sixteenth part of the ‘*suvarṇa*’, and ‘*kṛṣṇala*’ to the third part of
the ‘*kaṛsa*’, which latter is the fifth part of the ‘*māṣa*’. It
remarks that ‘*karṣa*’ is one of the names of silver.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Vrata, p. 53);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Dāna,
4a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.131-137)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.131].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

134	Six grains of white mustard are one middle-sized barley-corn, and three barley-corns one krishnala (raktika, or gunga-berry); five krishnalas are one masha (bean), and sixteen of those one suvarna.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/135_palaM_suvarNAsh.md">
<details open><summary><h3>135 पलं सुवर्णाश् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पलं सुवर्णाश् चत्वारः  
पलानि धरणं दश ।  
द्वे कृष्णले समधृते  
विज्ञेयो रौप्यमाषकः [मेधातिथिपाठः - रूप्यमाषकः]  ॥ ८.१३५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/135_palaM_suvarNAsh.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Four ‘gold-pieces’ make one ‘pala,’ ten palas one ‘dharaṇa’; and two ‘guñja-berries’ of equal weight should be known as one ‘silver-bean.’—(135)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^१७१]:
     M G DK: raupya-

**पलम्** इति संज्ञानिर्देशः । **सुवर्णम्** इति संज्ञी । **चत्वार** इति विशेषणम् । **धरणम्** इति संज्ञा । **दश पलानीति** संज्ञी । **द्वे कृष्णले** इति संज्ञा । **रूप्यमाषक** इति समुदायसंज्ञां[^१७२] मन्यन्ते । <u>ननु</u> रूप्यविषयमाषकनिर्देशे द्वे कृष्णले प्रतिपत्तव्ये इति प्रतिजानीते । ततश् चानिश्चयः[^१७३] । **समधृते** । तुलासूत्रके उन्मानादिहीने[^१७४] यदि धार्येते । प्रयोजनं मध्यशब्दवत् (म्ध् ८.१३४), यतो ऽसमयाद् धार्यमाणतया परिमाणानिश्चयः ॥ ८.१३५ ॥


[^१७४]:
     M G: unmānād ahīne


[^१७३]:
     M G: prādeśaniścayaḥ


[^१७२]:
     M G: -saṃjñā; DK samudāyaṃ saṃjñāṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Pala*’ is the name, and ‘*gold-piece*’ the thing named, ‘*four*’ is
its qualifying adjunct.

‘*Two kṛṣṇalas*’ is the thing named, and the compound term
‘*Silver-Bean*’ the name.

“What the text declares is that when we come to ascertain the exact
measure of the ‘*Bean*’ in connection with silver, we have to understand
it us being equal to ‘*two guñja-berries*.’ Now this makes the measure
indefinite.”

It is in view of this that the text has added the epithet ‘*of equal
weight*’; *i.e*., the two are to be held on each pan of the
weighing-scale, without any other kinds of measure. The sense of this
epithet has to be explained on the same lines as that of the epithet
‘*middling*’ (in verse 134); and its use lies in the fact that if
unequal beans were meant, the weight would remain indefinite.—(135)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 115);—in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 666), which adds that the construction is
‘*daśapalāni dharaṇam*’;—in *Hemādri* (Vrata, p. 58);—and in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Dāna, 4a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.131-137)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.131].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

135	Four suvarnas are one pala, and ten palas one dharana; two krishnalas (of silver), weighed together, must be considered one mashaka of silver.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/136_te_ShoDasha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>136 ते षोडश ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ते षोडश स्याद् +धरणं  
पुराणश् चैव राजतः ।  
कार्षापणस् तु विज्ञेयस्  
ताम्रिकः कार्षिकः पणः  ॥ ८.१३६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/136_te_ShoDasha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Sixteen of these latter make one ‘silver-dharaṇa’ or ‘purāṇa’; and a ‘karṣa’ of copper is to be known as ‘kārṣāpaṇa’ or ‘paṇa.’—(136)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**षोडश**रूप्यमाषका रूप्यस्य **धरणं** भवति । **पुराण** इति संज्ञान्तरम् । **कार्षापणः** पण इति च द्वे संज्ञे ताम्रकर्षस्य । कर्षाख्यश् च शब्दो लोकत एव प्रसिद्धार्थ इह गृह्यते व्यभिचारदर्शनासत्त्ववचनेन[^१७५] न कृष्णलादिवत् परिभाष्यते ॥ ८.१३६ ॥


[^१७५]:
     J: -darśanāsattvena
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Sixteen ‘*Silver-Beans*’ make a ‘*Silver-Dharaṇa*’; of which the other
name is ‘*Purāṇa*.’

‘*Kārṣāpaṇa*’ and ‘*Paṇa*’ are the two names of the ‘Copper-karṣa’; the
term ‘*Karṣa*’ is used here in the sense in which it is used among the
people, and it is not used in any technical sense, in the way in which
‘*Kṛṣṇala*’ and other terms have been used.—(136)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“*Karṣa =* 16 *Māṣas* = 80 *Kṛṣṇalas*.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 115), which
adds that the names ‘*purāṇa*’ and ‘*dharaṇa*’ stand for the tenth part
of a ‘*pala*’ of *silver*; the name, ‘*māṣa*’ as applied to silver,
stands for the fortieth part of the ‘*karṣa*’.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 666), which explains the
construction as ‘*dharaṇam rājatam purāṇaśca rājataḥ*’; and explains
that ‘*kārṣāpaṇa*’ and ‘*paṇa*’ are the names of the *copper* ‘*karṣa*’.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (1.364 and 365), to the effect that
‘*dharaṇa*’ is only another name for ‘*purāṇa*’; and adds the
explanation that a piece of copper one *karṣa* in weight is called
‘*paṇa*’, and also ‘*kārṣāpaṇa*’;—in *Hemādri* (Vrata, p. 53);—and in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Dāna, 4a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.131-137)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.131].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

136	Sixteen of those make a silver dharana, or purana; but know (that) a karsha of copper is a karshapana, or pana.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/137_dharaNAni_dasha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>137 धरणानि दश ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

धरणानि दश ज्ञेयः  
शतमानस् तु राजतः ।  
चतुःसौवर्णिको निष्को  
विज्ञेयस् तु प्रमाणतः  ॥ ८.१३७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/137_dharaNAni_dasha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Ten ‘dharaṇas’ are to be known as the ‘silver śatamāna’ (centimetre); and the ‘niṣka’ should be understood as four ‘gold-pieces’ in weight.—(137)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**शतमान** इति संज्ञा दशानां धरणानाम् । **रजत**शब्देन सुवर्णम् अप्य् उच्यते । तेन रूप्यसुवर्णयोर् इयं संज्ञा । सुवर्णस्य मानं[^१७६] तु शास्त्रान्तरात् परिमातव्यम् । तथा च विशेषयिष्यति **शतमानं तु राजतम्** इति ॥ ८.१३७ ॥


[^१७६]:
     M G: samānaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Śatamāna*,’ ‘*Centimetre*,’ is the name for ten ‘*Dharaṇas*’; here the
term ‘*Silver*’ includes *Gold* also. Hence the name ‘*Śatamāna*’ here
put forth is applicable to both gold and silver; but its exact measure
when applied to gold is to be ascertained from other treatises; since it
is here distinctly specified as the ‘*Silver-Śatamāna*’—(137)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 666);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 115), which adds that the terms ‘*nīṣka*’ and
‘*śatamāna*’ are applied to one *pala* of silver;—in *Hemādri* (Vrata,
p. 53);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Dāna, 4a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.131-137)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.131].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

137	Know (that) ten dharanas of silver make one satamana; four suvarnas must be considered (equal) in weight to a nishka.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/138_paNAnAn_dve.md">
<details open><summary><h3>138 पणानान् द्वे ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पणानां द्वे शते सार्धे  
प्रथमः साहसः स्मृतः ।  
मध्यमः पञ्च विज्ञेयः  
सहस्रं त्व् एव चोत्तमः  ॥ ८.१३८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/138_paNAnAn_dve.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The first amercement has been declared to be two hundred and fifty paṇas; the middling is to be known as five hundred; and the highest as a thousand.—(138)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**मधयम उत्तम** इत्य् अत्र साहसपदानुषङ्गः कर्तव्यः । मधमोत्तमशब्दाव् अत्र केवलाव् अपि शास्त्रान्तरदृष्टौ- "आभ्यां दण्ड उत्तमः" इति । तत्र शास्त्रसिद्ध्या साहचर्यात् साहसं प्रतीयते । अवयवाः स्पष्टाः ॥ ८.१३८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*amercement*’ is to be construed also with the terms
‘*middling*’ and ‘*highest*’; though in other treatises these two terms
are found to be used by themselves also:—*e.g*., the punishment with
these is the ‘*Highest*.’ From the point of view of the scriptures, and
also from the juxtaposition of the words, they are to be regarded as
qualifying ‘*amercement*.’

The words of the text are quite clear.—(138)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Sahasram*’—“Copper *paṇas* are meant”—Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (1.366), which remarks that the
fines here prescribed pertain to offences committed unintentionally;—in
*Aparārka*, (p. 592), which adds that these pertain to slight
offences;—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 665);—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti,
p. 295), which reproduces the words of *Aparārka*;—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 938);—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 192),
which says that the numbers refer to *copper kārṣāpaṇas*.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (4.14).—‘250 copper *Paṇas* constitute the first amercement; 500
*Paṇas* the middlemost amercement; 1,000 Paṇas, the highest amercement.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.364).—‘1,080 *Paṇas* constitute the highest amercement;
540 *Paṇas*, the middlemost;—270 *Paṇas*, the lowest.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 664).—‘From 24 to 91 is the first
amercement, 200 to 500, the middlemost amercement; 600 to 1,000, the
highest amercement; to he determined in accordance with the resources of
the culprit and the nature of his offence.’

*Nārada* (Do.).—‘24 to 96 is the first amercement; 200 to 500, the
middlemost; 500 to 1,000 the highest.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सर्वसंज्ञार्थाः श्लोकाः । तत्र य एतेषु संछन्नेषु कूटीमठेष्व् [आदित्यकरदृष्टास् रे]णवस् ते त्रयस् त्रसरेणवः ॥ ८.१३२–१३७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

138	Two hundred and fifty panas are declared (to be) the first (or lowest) amercement, five (hundred) are considered as the mean (or middlemost), but one thousand as the highest.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/139_RNe_deye.md">
<details open><summary><h3>139 ऋणे देये ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ऋणे देये प्रतिज्ञाते  
पञ्चकं शतम् अर्हति ।  
अपह्नवे तद्द्विगुणं  
तन् मनोर् अनुशासनम्  ॥ ८.१३९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/139_RNe_deye.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

On the debt being admitted to be due, the debtor deserves (a fine of) five per cent.; and in the case of denial, twice as much; such is the ordinance of manu.—(139)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यो राजसभायाम् आनीतो धर्मेण ऋणं देयतया प्रतिजानीते "सत्यम् अस्मै धारयामि," स **पञ्चकं शतम् अर्हति** दण्डम् इति शेषः । अनेन संकल्पितेन विंशतितमो भागो दण्ड्यते । किम् इति । "मत्सकाशम्[^१७७] उत्तमर्णः प्रेषितो बहिर् एव कस्मान् न परितोषितः" इत्य् अतो ऽनेन शास्त्रव्यतिक्रमेण दण्डम् अर्हति । यस् तु व्यतिक्रमान्तरं करोत्य् **अपह्नुते** "नाहम् अस्मै धारयामि" इति, स तैः प्रतिपादितस् **तद्द्विगुणं** । तस्मात् पञ्चकाद् द्विगुणं दशकं शतम् इत्य् अर्थः । **तन् मनोः** प्रजापतेर् **अनुशासनं** सृष्टिकालप्रभृतिव्यवस्था नीतिर् इति यावत् ।


[^१७७]:
     M G: tatsakāśam

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु **तच्**छब्देन देयम् एव प्रत्यवमृशन्ति । यावत् तस्मै देयं तद्द्विगुणम् । तेन यावद् ऋणम् इत्य् अनेनैकवाक्यं भवति । अन्यथा वाक्यभेदः । विषयविशेषानिर्देशाद् एकविषयत्वे विकल्पः प्राप्नोति । 

<u>स च</u> न युक्तो द्विगुणस्यात्यन्तबहुत्वात् । असत्य् अपि निर्देशे तस्य विषयो दर्शनीयः,[^१७८] तस्य प्रत्यासन्ने[^१७९] पञ्चकम् इति, अर्थात्[^१८०] तस्यैवानुप्रत्यवमर्शो युक्तः ॥ ८.१३९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When the debtor, on being summoned to the King’s Court, admits the debt
as legally due by him, saying—‘I do really owe this to him,’—then
‘*i.e., deserves five per cent*.’ ‘*as fine*’;—this has to be added. By
this rule, the man is to be fined the twentieth part of the amount of
debt claimed. The man deserves this fine on account of his having
transgressed the law by not satisfying the creditor’s claims outside the
Court and thereby forcing him to come up to the king.

When the man commits a further transgression by denying the claim,
saying—‘I do not owe anything to this person,’—then, on the claim being
proved, the man is to be fined ‘*twice* as *much*’; *i.e*., double of
five per cent.; *i.e*., ten per cent.

‘*Such is the ordinance of Manu*’—Prajāpati; *i.e*., the Rule or Law
propounded by him from the very beginning of creation.

Others have explained the term ‘*as much*’ as referring to the total
amount of the claim, *i.e*., double the sum that is due to the debtor;
as it is only thus that the syntactical connection with the term
‘*debt*’ is maintained; otherwise there is a syntactical split; and as
no different subject has been mentioned, if it referred to the same
subject, then the result would be an option.

This however is not right; for the double of the amount of debt would he
too much. Even though the subject is not definitely mentioned, yet on
account of juxtaposition, it is only right that it should be taken as
referring to ‘*five per cent*.’—(139)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Taddviguṇam*’—‘Double of 5 p. c., *i.e*., 10 p. c.’ This is the
explanation, accepted by all the commentators. But Medhātithi mentions
‘others’ as explaining the meaning to be ‘double of the amount of the
debt’ This latter would be more in keeping with what has gone before in
verse 59.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 77), which adds the
following notes:—The meaning is as follows: If the debt is at first
denied, and subsequently admitted, then the debtor should be fined 5 per
cent on the amount of debt; but if he does not admit it even
subsequently—and yet the debt becomes proved by the evidence
adduced,—then the man shall be fined the ‘double of that,’ *i.e*., 10
per cent. It proceeds to add a note which serves to explain the
inconsistency of this rule with what has gone in verse 59:—the diversity
is due to considerations of the nature of the debtor’s motives.

It is quoted in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 34), which adds the explanation
that ‘when a debt is denied at first and subsequently admitted, the
debtor is to he fined 5 per cent, and if the man continues to deny the
debt which is subsequently proved, the fine is to be 10 per cent; and
adds that this refers to cases where the debtor is poor’;—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (81a), which has the following explanation:—(a) If the
man has denied the debt but admits it when sued in Court, then he is to
be fined 5 p. c., (b) if he continues to deny it in the Court, but the
debt is subsequently proved, then the fine is 10 per cent;—this refers
to cases where the former denial has been based upon some
misapprehension on the part of the debtor; the case where the denial is
through perversity and intentional, has been dealt with under 59.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 111a), which explains the
meaning to be ‘when the man having denied the debt at first, admits it
when sued and brought before the Court, he should pay a fine of 5 p. c.
and if he continues to deny it, but is subsequently forced by evidence
to admit, then 10 p. c.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (6.20-22).—‘If a creditor goes before the King and fully proves
his demand, the debtor shall pay as fine to the King a tenth part of the
sum proved. The creditor, on receiving the sum, shall pay the twentieth
part of it. If the whole demand has been contested by the debtor, and
even a part of it has been proved against him, he must pay the whole.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.44).—‘Out of the sum proved against him, the King shall
make the debtor pay ten per cent, (as fine) and the creditor, on having
realised his dues, shall pay five per cent,’

*Nārada* (1.132-134).—‘If a wealthy debtor, from malice) refuses to pay
his debt, the King shall compel him to pay it by forcible means, and
shall take five in the hundred for himself. If the debtor acknowledges
the debt with his own mouth, the King shall take from him ten per cent,
of the debt as fine; and twice as much if he has been convicted. If the
debtor, owing to a calamity, has not means sufficient to discharge the
whole debt, the claim of the creditor shall be entered in a legal
document, specifying the caste of the debtor and of the creditor, their
names, and the names of their neighbours.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.60-02).—‘When the time fixed for pay ment has elapsed,
and the accruing of interest has ceased, the creditor may either recover
his loan or cause a new bond to bo written in the form of compound
interest. This rule concerns an acknowledged debt; but a debtor denying
his liability shall be compelled to pay, on the debt being proved in a
court, by a document or by witnesses.’

*Yama* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 78).—‘If a wealthy debtor refuses to repay
the debt, through ill-will, he should be compelled by the King to pay,
after having realised from him double the amount of the claim.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ऋणव्यवहारे स्वयं प्रतिपन्नो विंश[तिभागम्, प्रतिपादि]तः साक्ष्यादिभिर् दशभागम् । असमर्थो दण्डलेशं यत् किंचिद् इति । तच् चोक्तं पुरस्ताद् "दण्डलेशं च शक्तितः" इति । एते त्रयो ऽधर्मर्णस्य दण्डाः । ये तूत्तमर्णं दशभागं दापयन्ति अधमर्णं चान्यं दण्डं स्मृत्यन्तरात् ते दापयन्ति । इदं तु मानवं दर्शनम् ॥ ८.१३८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

139	A debt being admitted as due, (the defendant) shall pay five in the hundred (as a fine), if it be denied (and proved) twice as much; that is the teaching of Manu.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/140_vasiShThavihitAM_vRddhim.md">
<details open><summary><h3>140 वसिष्ठविहितां वृद्धिम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वसिष्ठविहितां वृद्धिं  
सृजेद् वित्तविवर्धिनीम् ।  
अशीतिभागं गृह्णीयान्  
मासाद् वार्धुषिकः शते  ॥ ८.१४० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/140_vasiShThavihitAM_vRddhim.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The money-lender shall stipulate an interest sanctioned by Vasiṣṭha, for increasing the capital. He shall take monthly the eightieth part of a hundred.—(140)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अशीतीति** विधेयनिर्देशः । **वसिष्ठविहिताम्** इत्यादिर् अर्थवादः । वसिष्ठो भववान् त्रिकालज्ञो लोभादिदोषरहित इति[^१८१] तां **वृद्धिं** गृहीतवान्, अत एषा प्रशस्ता । धनं तया वृद्धिम् उपैति, न च लोभदोषो ऽस्ति । **सृजेत्** प्रयुञ्जीत । यदा धनं तदाधर्मणस्य तां वृद्धिं धनप्रयोगकाले निर्दिशेत् । सर्वद्रव्येषु वस्त्रधान्यहिरण्यादिष्व् एतद् एव वृद्धिपरिमाणम् । संख्येयपरिमेयादिषु[^१८२] "रसस्याष्टगुणा वृद्धिः" (च्ड़्। य्ध् २.४०) इत्यादिषु द्वैगुण्यापवाद इति वक्ष्यामः ॥ ८.१४० ॥


[^१८२]:
     M G J: -parameyādiṣu (I follow DK 5: 1183)


[^१८१]:
     DK (5: 1183) omits: iti
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*He shall take, etc*.’ (the second half of the verse) represents the
injunction; and what is said regarding its being ‘*sanctioned by*
*Vasiṣṭha*’ is merely commendatory;—the sense being that ‘Vasiṣṭha, the
revered sage, cognisant of all that happens at the three points of time
and devoid of greed, accepted interest, hence it is commendable.’ ‘By
its means one’s capital increases, and yet there is no impropriety in it
on the ground of its being indicative of greed.

‘*Stipulate*,’—Employ; at the time that he is advancing money to the
debtor, he should clearly stipulate the rate of interest.

In the case of all things that can be counted or measured,—such as
clothes, grains, gold and so forth- the rate of interest is to be as
here laid down. In the case of liquor, however, the rate of interest has
been declared to be eight times of the principal,—and this is an
exception to the limit that the total amount of the debt shall not
exceed the double of the principal, as we shall explain later on.—(140)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This rule, here attributed to Vasiṣṭha, actually occurs in
Vasiṣṭha-Dharmaśāstra, 2.51.

“According to Kullūka, (on 142), Nārāyaṇa, Rāghavānanda and Nandana,
this rule refers to a debt secured by a pledge, find the correctness of
this view is proved by the parallel passage of Yājñavalkya
(2.37).”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara*, p. 7, which explains
‘*māsāt*’ as ‘after the lapse of one month,’ and adds that this refers
to debt that is secured by a pledge that can be enjoyed (by the
creditor).

*Smṛtitattva* (p. 349) quotes the second half and adds that ‘of 100
*kārṣāpaṇas*’, the ‘eightieth part’ would be 20 *paṇas*.

It is quoted in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 420), which explains
‘*aśītibhāgam*’ as 20 *paṇas*;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 325);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 91b), which says that this refers to cases
of mortgage, and the meaning is that when 100 rupees have been advanced,
the creditor should charge 1¼ rupee after the lapse of one month.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.140-142)  
**

*Gautama* (12.29-30).—‘The legal interest for money lent is five *māṣas*
a month for twenty *kārṣāpaṇas*. Some declare that this rate should not
he paid longer than one year.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (2.48).—‘They quote the following—2, 3, 4 or 5, in the
hundred, he may take as interest per month, according to the order of
the castes.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (2.51).—‘The interest for a money-lender declared by Vaśiṣṭha
is five *māṣas* for twenty *Kāṛṣāpanas*, per month.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.37).—‘In the case of loans with pledges, the interest
per month shall be the eightieth part; in those without pledges, it
shall be 2, 3, 4 or 5 per cent, respectively for the Brāhmaṇa, the
Kṣatriya, the Vaiśya and the Śūdra.’

*Nārada* (1.99-101).—‘Let a money-lender take, in addition to the
principal, the interest fixed by Vaśiṣṭha, *viz*., an eightieth part of
a hundred every month. 2, 3, or 5 (in the hundred) is the legitimate
rate of interest; let him take as much in the shape of interest, every
month, in the direct order of the four castes. Or let him take 2 in the
100, remembering the practice of the virtuous.

*Bṛhaspati* (11.3).—‘An eightieth part of the principal accrues as
interest on it every month; and it is doubled by such interest within
six years and eight months.’

*Artha-Śāstra* (p. 61).—‘The legal interest, per month, on every 100
Paṇas, is 1¼ Paṇas; it is 5 Paṇas in business transactions; 10 Paṇas for
people trading in forests; and 20 Paṇas for those trading on the seas.’

*Viṣṇu* (6.1-5).—‘A creditor shall receive his principal back from his
debtor exactly as he had lent it to him. As regards interest, he shall
take, in the direct order of the castes, 2, 3, 4 or 5 percent., per
month, if no pledge has been given; or the debtor of any caste may pay
as much as has been promised by him. After the lapse of one year, let
them pay interest according to the afore-mentioned rule, even though it
may not have been agreed upon. By the use of the pledge, interest
becomes forfeited.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अशीतभागः प्रथमः कल्पः प्रयुक्तस्यार्थस्य वृद्धिः ॥ ८.१३९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

140	A money-lender may stipulate as an increase of his capital, for the interest, allowed by Vasishtha, and take monthly the eightieth part of a hundred.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/141_dvikaM_shatam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>141 द्विकं शतम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

द्विकं शतं वा गृह्णीयात्  
सतां धर्मम् अनुस्मरन् ।  
द्विकं शतं हि गृह्णानो  
न भवत्य् अर्थकिल्बिषी  ॥ ८.१४१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/141_dvikaM_shatam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Or, remembering the duty of the righteous, he may take two in the hundred; by taking two per cent. he does not incur the sin of extortion.—(141)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

द्वौ वृद्धिर् अस्मिन् शते दीयते तद् द्विकं शतम्[^१८३] । द्विशता[^१८४] पूर्वयाजिवतो बहुकुटुम्बस्यायं द्विकशतविधिः । मासम् अनुवर्तते । **सताम्** इत्यादिर् अत्रायम् अर्थवादः । **सतां धर्मम्** इति एषापि वृद्धिः साधूनां धर्मः । नैतया साधुत्वं हीयते । नात्यन्तम् अर्थपर उच्यते । तद् दर्शयति- **न भवत्य् अर्थकिल्बिषी** । अन्यायेन परस्वग्रहणात् पापम् अर्थकिल्बिषम्, तद् अस्यास्तीत्य् **अर्थकिल्बिषी** ॥ ८.१४१ ॥


[^१८४]:
     DK (1.612; 5: 1183) omits dviśatā


[^१८३]:
     M G omit: tad dvikaṃ śatam; DK (1.612) omit: tad
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Two in the hundred*’,—*i.e*., for each hundred an interest of two is
paid.

This rule permitting an interest of two per cent, is for that
money-lender who, having a large family, is unable to maintain them if
he charges only the rate laid down in the preceding verse.

The term ‘*monthly*’ (of the preceding verse) has to be construed with
this also.

‘*Remembering, etc*.’;—all this is merely commendatory. The meaning is
that the taking of this interest also is within the province of the
conduct of good men; so that by charging it one does not lose his
righteousness.

The author proceeds to show that such a money-lender is not regarded as
greedy of wealth—‘*He does not incur the sin of extortion*’; the sin
involved in unlawfully taking what belongs to another is called ‘the sin
of extortion’; and he who does such an act is said to ‘*incur the sin of
extortion*.’—(141)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This applies to debts not secured by a pledge—say Nārāyaṇa and
Rāghavānanda;—according to Medhātithi this higher rate is permitted for
those who have a large family to support and hence require a huge income
from their loan-transactions.

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 349), which adds that
‘*Dvikam*’ means *two Purāṇas*;—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 8);—in
*Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 420), which explains ‘*Dvikam*’ as
*Purāṇas*;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (81a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.140-142)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.140].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पञ्चाशद्भागो ऽनुकल्पः ॥ ८.१४० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

141	Or, remembering the duty of good men, he may take two in the hundred (by the month), for he who takes two in the hundred becomes not a sinner for gain.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/142_dvikan_trikam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>142 द्विकन् त्रिकम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

द्विकं त्रिकं चतुष्कं च  
पञ्चकं च शतं समम् ।  
मासस्य वृद्धिं गृह्णीयाद्  
वर्णानाम् अनुपूर्वशः  ॥ ८.१४२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/142_dvikan_trikam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He may charge just two, three, four or five per cent. per month from the four castes respectively.—(142)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

ब्राह्मणादिवर्णक्रमेण चतुर्णां वर्णानां सकाशाद् द्विकादयश् चत्वारः कल्पा यथासंख्येन[^१८५] ग्राह्यतयानुज्ञायन्ते । **समम्** । न पादेन वार्धेन वाधिकम् । तदाधिक्ये[^१८६] ऽपि सपादद्विकं सार्धद्विकम् इति द्विकादिव्यपदेशस्यानिवृत्तेर् आशङ्कानिवारणार्थं **सम**ग्रहणम्, यथा मात्रान्यत्वे ऽपि संज्ञान्तरव्यपदेशं निवर्तयति[^१८७] । इदम् अपि पूर्वेणाजिवतः कल्पान्तरम् । यस्य वाल्पं धनं महते धर्माय ग्रहीतारश्[^१८८] च नातिधार्मिकास्[^१८९] तत्रायं विधिः, "ये ऽसाधुभ्यो ऽर्थम् आदाय" (म्ध् ११.१८) इति न्यायेन । "समाम्" इति पाठान्तरम् । संवत्सरं यावद् एषा वृद्धिर् न परतो ऽपि, महत्त्वाद् द्वैगुण्यं[^१९०] स्यात् ॥ ८.१४२ ॥


[^१९०]:
     M G: mahattvādikatvādvaiguṇyaṃ


[^१८९]:
     M G: yasya vā mahate dharmāya gṛhārambho rājā ca nātidhārmikas 


[^१८८]:
     J: gṛhītāraś


[^१८७]:
     DK (1: 612) emends the text: yady api nātra saṃkhyā saṃkhyāntaravyapadeśaṃ nivartayati |


[^१८६]:
     M G J: tadādhiko


[^१८५]:
     DK (5: 1184) suggests: yāthāsaṃkhyena
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

From the four castes, *Brāhmaṇa* and the rest, respectively, he shall
charge the four rates, two per cent, and so forth. These four rates are
sanctioned in relation to the four castes respectively.

‘*Just*,’—*i.e*., not exceeding by even a half or a quarter. This term
has been added to preclude the idea that the expression ‘two per cent.’
may be applicable to ‘two and a quarter’ or ‘two and a half.’ Just as
the shortest alteration, even by a single syllable, of a name makes the
name a totally different one (so the addition of even a quarter would
make the rate totally different).

This also is an alternative open to the man who cannot maintain his
family at the former rate of interest; or to one who has only a small
capital; or to cases where the borrowers are not specially righteous
persons.

The propriety of this would be analogous to the act of doing a righteous
act with the money extorted from wicked persons.

For ‘*samam*,’ ‘just,’ another reading is ‘*samām*.’

This rate of interest however is to be charged for one year only, and
not beyond that; as the rates being high, the principal might become
more than doubled.—(142)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This rule is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 8), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Dvikam*’ means ‘that in which two *Purāṇas* per month
are charged’; so with ‘*trika*’ and the other terms.—From the Brāhmaṇa,
Kṣatriya, Vaiśya and Śūdra, one should charge an interest of two, three,
four and five *Purāṇas* respectively, for every hundred of the debt;—in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 320);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (67b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.140-142)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.140].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अयं च वर्णानुपूर्व्यात् तृतीयः कल्पः । एषां तु पूर्वः पूर्वो ज्यायान् । अन्ये ऽपि तु समाम् इति पठन्ति । समाग्रहणाद् अत्रेयं वृद्धिर् न संवत्सरात् परतः । पूर्वातः स्यात् । परतो ऽपि अल्पत्वाद् वृद्धेः । प्रयोगश् च द्विविधो भवति । गृहीत्वा चाधिम् अन्यथा च । तत्राधिग्रहणपक्षे विशेषार्थम् इदम् उच्यते — ॥ ८.१४१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

142	Just two in the hundred, three, four, and five (and not more), he may take as monthly interest according to the order of the castes (varna).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/143_na_tv.md">
<details open><summary><h3>143 न त्व् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

न त्व् एवाधौ सोपकारे  
कौसीदीं वृद्धिम् आप्नुयात् ।  
न चाधेः कालसंरोधान्  
निसर्गो ऽस्ति न विक्रयः  ॥ ८.१४३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/143_na_tv.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But when there is profitable pledge, he shall receive no interest on the loan; and there shall be neither transference nor sale of the pledge, merely by the lapse of time.—(143)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

बहुधा प्रयोगः- गृहीत्वाधिम् अन्यथा च । आधिर् अपि द्विविधः- गोप्यो भोग्यश् च । भोग्यो ऽपि द्विविधः- समयाद् उह्यमानभोगः सरूपतो वा । आधिर् दोग्ध्री गौः पिहितसुवर्णादि । 

- तत्र भोग्यम् आधिम् अधिकृत्येदम् उच्यते । **न त्व् एवाधौ सोपकार** इति । विविधः[^१९१] सोपकारः- क्षीरिणी गौः क्षेत्रारामादि च । तस्मिन् भुज्यमाने — कुसीदे भवा **कौसीदी** अनन्तरोक्ता वृद्धिस् — ताम् नाप्नुयात्[^१९२] । आधिं तु भुञ्जानो नान्यां वृद्धिं लभेत । गोप्ये ऽप्य् आधौ **कालसंरोधाच्** चिरम् अवस्थानाद् द्विगुणीभूते ऽप्य् अमोक्षमाणे[^१९३] **न निसर्गो ऽस्ति न विक्रयः** । अन्यत्र च विधिनार्पणं **निसर्गः** । अन्यत्र संक्रामितं[^१९४] द्विगुणीभूतम् अपि पुनर् वर्धत एव । तथा अ पठिष्यति "सकृद् आहृता" (म्ध् ८.१५१) इति । **विक्रयः** प्रसिद्धः । सो ऽपि न कर्तव्यः । 


[^१९४]:
     J: saṃkrāmi


[^१९३]:
     DK (5: 1184) suggests: amokṣyamāṇe


[^१९२]:
     M G DK (1: 638): āpnuyāt (omit "na"); but DK (5: 1184) retains "na"


[^१९१]:
     M G: vividha-

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;किं तर्ह्य् अस्याम् अवस्थायां कर्तव्यम् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;तावद्[^१९५] <u>आधिं</u> भुञ्जीत यावद् द्विगुणं धनं प्रविष्टम् । ततः, 


[^१९५]:
     M G DK omit: tāvad

- मोच्य आधिस् तदुत्पन्ने प्रविष्टे द्विगुणे धने । (य्ध् २.६६) 

भोग्यस् तावद् एवम्[^१९६] । भोग्यस्[^१९७] त्व् आधिः शान्तलभस् तिष्ठत्य् एव यावद् आधाता नागतः । यस् तु कथंचिद् धनिको दरिद्रताम् उपगतस् तावन्मात्रशेषधनः स कंचित् कालं प्रतीक्ष्य राजनि निवेद्य विक्रीणीत बन्धम्, ततो विक्रयाद् उत्पन्नं द्विगुणम् आत्मनो धनं गृहीत्वा शेषं मध्यस्थहस्ते ऋणिकसात्कुर्यात् ।


[^१९७]:
     M G: abhogyas


[^१९६]:
     M G DK (1: 638) add: abhogyas tāvat evam; J adds: abhogyas tadanantaram (the reading here is rather confused).

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च 

- आधिः प्रणश्येद् द्विगुणे धने यदि न मोक्षयेत् । (य्ध् २.६०) 

इति पठ्यते । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;एतद् उत्तरत्र व्याख्यास्यामः । प्रणाश्यत्वान् न[^१९८] पूर्वस्वामिनः स्वाम्यहानिः प्रयोक्तुश् च स्वत्त्वापत्तिः । यदि च निसर्गविक्रयौ न स्तः, कीदृशम् अस्य स्वाम्यम् उच्यते । तस्मात् प्रतिषेधसामर्थ्येन प्रणाशवचनं प्रतिषिद्धभोगस्य[^१९९] भोगानुज्ञानार्थं व्याख्यायते । वस्त्रादिविषयं वा । तस्य हि भुज्यमानस्य प्रणाश एव । न क्षेत्रादेर् इव तिष्ठतः स्वरूपाद् प्रच्यवमानस्य[^२००] भोग्यता संभवति । तेनैतत् स्मृतिव्यवस्थायां व्याख्येयम् । 


[^२००]:
     M G J: svarūpāt prapacyavamānasya; DK (1: 638): acyavamānasya (I follow DK 5: 1184; reading is unclear)


[^१९९]:
     M G: praṇāśavacanapratiṣiddhabhoga iti


[^१९८]:
     DK (1: 638) suggests : praṇāśyatvaṃ cātra; (5: 1184): praṇāśyatvam atra

गौणौ चात्र प्रणाशनिसर्गौ । विक्रयप्रतिषेधस् तु मुख्य एव । न ह्य् असौ गौणतया प्रतिपत्तुं शक्यते । एतद् एव प्रस्तुत्य "न स्यातां विक्रयाधीने" इति स्मृत्यन्तरपठितम्[^२०१] । अत इह **निसर्गो** ऽन्यत्राधानम्, विक्रयसाहचर्यात् ।सदृशौ हि तौ केनचिद् अंशेन ॥ ८.१४३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Money-lending is done in various forms—with pledge as well as without
pledge. Pledge also is of two kinds—*to be used* and *to be kept*. That
*to be used* is again of two kinds—(*a*) that in which the profit
consists in some form of product of the pledged article and (*b*) that
which is used as it stands; the milch cow belongs to the former class,
and wrought gold, etc., to the latter.

What is said here regarding the case ‘*when there is profitable pledge*’
refers to the pledge *to be used*.

The ‘*profitable pledge*’ is of various kinds, such as the milch cow,
fields, gardens and so forth.

While such a pledge is being used by the money-lender, ‘*he shall
receive no interest*,’ such as that laid down in the foregoing
verses—‘*on the loan*.’ That is, he who is deriving a profit from the
pledge shall receive no other kind of interest.

In the case of the pledge *to be kept* also, ‘*merely by the lapse of
time*,’—simply because a longtime has elapsed,—even becoming doable of
its former size, and the pledge remains unredeemed,—‘*there shall be
neither transference nor selling*.’ ‘*Transference*’ consists in the
article being duly made over to another person. Even though already
doubled, the principal, even on the transference of the pledge, shall
continue to grow: as is going to be declared later on—‘*sakṛdāhṛta*,’
etc. ‘*Selling*’ is well known. This also shall not be done.

“What then is to be done in such cases?”

The man shall continue to use (derive proñt from) the pledge, till the
principal has become doubled and repaid; when it shall be redeemed. When
the doubled principal has been repaid, the pledge ‘to be used’ shall
cease to be used, and that ‘to be kept’ shall be returned. The pledge
‘to be used’ shall remain with the creditor till the debt is
repaid,—unless there is some damage. If there is some damage done, and
the creditor somehow has become too poor, having no other property
except that pledged article, then, having waited for some time, he shall
report it to the king and sell the article; and from the sale-proceeds
he shall take an amount which is just the double of his principal, and
hand over to a middle-man the balance for being paid over to the debtor.

“But it is declared that—‘if on the principal having been doubled, the
pledge is not redeemed, it becomes lost (forfeited)’ (Yājñavalkya,
*Vyavahāra*, 58)”

This we are going to explain. As a matter of fact, this ‘forfeiture’ or
‘loss’ does.not mean that the former owner entirely loses his ownership,
and the person having it acquires ownership over it. For when there can
be no ‘transference or sale,’ what sort of ‘ownership’ would the man
acquire? Hence, by virtue of the said prohibition of ‘transference or
sale,’ the ‘loss’ or ‘forfeiture’ must he taken to mean that the
creditor who may have ceased to use it becomes entitled to use it again.
Or the term ‘loss’ may he taken as referring to such things as clothes
and the like, which naturally become ‘lost’ (perished) by using; and
which cannot continue to be *used* even when they have lost their
original form,—in the manner in which lands and other such things can
continue to be. It is in this sense that the Smṛti has to be explained.

In fact, the term ‘loss’ has been used in the figurative sense, of
permitting the *use* of it; while the prohibition of ‘transference and
sale’ must be taken in its literal sense; as this latter is not capable
of being understood in a figurative sense. It is in this sense that, we
have another *Smṛti* text to the effect that ‘there shall be no selling
or handing over of pledges, etc., etc.’ What is spoken of as ‘handing
over’ in this text is the same as ‘transference,’ as is clear from its
being mentioned along with ‘sale,’—both of them being similar in certain
respects.—(143)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“According to Medhātithi Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa, the last clause
refers to pledges which are not used; but Kullūka objects that this is
contrary to the common practice of the *Śiṣṭas*; and Rāghavānanda refers
to Yājñavalkya, 2.48. where it is clearly stated that beneficial pledges
only are never lost, while those which are merely kept are lost when the
original debt is doubled by unpaid interest.”—Buhler.

The first part of this verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 23),
which explains ‘*sopakāre*’ as ‘what is used or enjoyed’;—in *Aparārka*
(p. 659);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 15), which explains ‘*sopakāre*’ as
‘used’ or ‘enjoyed,’ and the mere fact of the thing having been used
deprives the creditor of the interest, and if, through some act of the
creditor, the article mortgaged loses its usefulness, the interest
ceases;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (70a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
95a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.143-144)  
**

*Gautama* (12-32).—‘A loan secured by a pledge that is used by the
creditor bears no interest.’

*Viṣṇu* (6.5).—‘If the pledge is used, interest becomes forfeited.’

*Nārada* (l.125-229).—‘A pledge is of two kinds—one to be kept, and one
for use. It must be preserved in the same condition in which it was
given; otherwise, the pledgee loses interest...... A pledge must not be
used forcibly; by so using it, the pledgee forfeits the interest due to
him. That foolish person who uses a pledge without the authority of the
owner, shall lose one half of his interest, as a compensation for such
use. If a *pledge for use* has been given, the creditor must not take
interest due on the loan.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.18 *et seq*.).—‘Should the creditor, actuated by
avarice, use a pledge before interest has ceased to accrue on the loan,
or before the stipulated period has expired, such use shall be stopped.
The pledge has to be kept carefully, like a deposit; interest becomes
forfeited in the event of its being damaged. If the pledge is used and
rendered worthless, the principal itself becomes forfeited; if a very
valuable pledge be spoilt, the creditor must satisfy the pledger.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.59).—‘There is no interest payable, if a pledge given
as deposit is used, or if a pledge given for use is destroyed; if it is
spoilt or lost, it should be replaced; except when such loss has been
due to an act of god or the King.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 659).—‘If the pledge in the form of gold and the
like, has been destroyed by the fault of the creditor, the debtor shall
pay the principal along with the interest accrued, and the creditor
shall be made to pay the value of the pledge to the debtor.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do.).—‘If the pledgee makes use of the pledge without
authorisation, he shall pay the price of such use; or else, he shall
forfeit the interest.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 3).—‘The man who uses the pledge should pay the price
of such use; also a fine of 12 *paṇas*; if, by such use, the pledge
becomes lost or spoilt, the user should replace it, and also be fined 21
*paṇas*; so also when the pledge becomes lost in any other way. A pledge
given for use should not be allowed to be destroyed; nor in this case
should any interest accrue; if it is given for mere keeping and not for
use, then interest shall accrue.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

भुञ्जानस्य हि प्रयोक्तुर् आधिं क्षेत्रादिकं वृद्धिर् न स्यात् । अर्थाच् चानुपकारिण्याधौ सोपकारे ऽपि च समयाद् अभुज्यमाने स्याद् वृद्धिः । न चाधेर् अभोग्यस्य कालसंरोधाद् द्विगुणीभूते ऽर्थे काले ऽधिगच्छति निसर्गो ऽस्यान्यत्राधमनम् अननुज्ञातस्य गृहीत्रा । किं तु यावद् धनं न प्रयच्छेद् द्विगुणीभूतं तावद् आधिं भुञ्जीतैव सामर्थ्याद् विज्ञायते, प्रयुक्तार्थसाधनाय । विक्रयसाधर्म्याच् चान्यत्राधमनं निसर्गो विज्ञायते । एवं विक्रयो ऽपि विज्ञेयः । तथा च सत्य् अर्थप्रयोगकाल एव प्रतिषिद्धेन प्रयोक्त्रा — ॥ ८.१४२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

143	But if a beneficial pledge (i.e. one from which profit accrues, has been given), he shall receive no interest on the loan; nor can he, after keeping (such) a pledge for a very long time, give or sell it.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/144_na_bhoktavyo.md">
<details open><summary><h3>144 न भोक्तव्यो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

न भोक्तव्यो बलाद् आधिर्  
भुञ्जानो वृद्धिम् उत्सृजेत् ।  
मूल्येन तोषयेच् चैनम्  
आधिस्तेनो ऽन्यथा भवेत्  ॥ ८.१४४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/144_na_bhoktavyo.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The pledge shall not be used by force; using it thus, he shall renounce the interest; he shall satisfy the other party with its pr ice; otherwise he would be a stealer of the pledge.—(144)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>
<u>ननु</u> च प्राग् अप्य् एतद् उक्तम् "न त्व् एवाधौ" (म्ध् ८.१४३) इति । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;सत्यम् । यत्र यावत्य् एव वृद्धिस् तावान् एव भोगः, स पूर्वस्य विषयः । यत्र तु महती वृद्धिः स्वल्पोपभोगश् चेद् बलादिना भुञ्जानस्य सर्वेण सर्ववृद्धिहानिः । यत्र क्षेत्रगवादिर् बन्धस् तद्भोगश् च न[^२०२] वृद्धिसंमितः, स चोपचिताम् अपि वृद्धिं न ददाति, न च धनं[^२०३] द्विगुणम्, तत्र कयाचिद् अतिमत्यात्यन्तम् उक्तैव वृद्धिर् निश्चेतव्या[^२०४] । 


[^२०४]:
     DK (1: 640) reads: dviguṇaṃ tatra | kadācit saṃmatyā yatra bhuṃkte, bhuktaiva vṛddhir niścetavyā |


[^२०३]:
     M G J: bandhanaṃ (see dviguṇībhūtaṃ dhanam under 8.145)


[^२०२]:
     M G omit: na

- यदि तु वस्त्रादि भुज्य्मानं नश्येत् तत्र **मूल्येन तोषयेद् एनम्** आधातारम् । इतरो ऽपि वृद्धिं लभते । अतो **ऽन्यथा**ददन् मूल्यम् **आधिस्तेनो भवेत्** । यज्जातीयम् आधिं भुक्तवांस् तदपहारे यो दण्डः स एव दाप्यः । स्तेनश् चौरः । 

<u>अन्ये</u> व्याचक्षते । बलाद् भुक्ते वृद्धिहानिः[^२०५] । भुञ्जीत तन्मूल्यत एव वा । यदृणिकस्य मूल्यं मूल्यहिरण्यम्[^२०६] । यत्र भुञ्जान उच्यते "मा मे बन्धं विनीनशो मा भुङ्क्थाः[^२०७] कतिपयैर् अहोभिर् मोक्षयामि," तथाप्य् उच्यमानो भुङ्क एवेति सो ऽस्य विषयः ॥ ८.१४४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

“It has been already declared in the preceding verse that—‘when there is
a profitable pledge, etc.’—(why then should this he repeated?).”

True; but the case referred to in the preceding verse is that ‘where the
*using* or *profit* is commensurate with the *interest*; when however
the amount of interest is large, while the *profit* is small, if the
creditor uses the pledge by force, he loses the whole amount of
interest. In a case again where the pledge is in the form of land or a
cow or some such thing, and the profit derived from it is not
commensurate with the interest,—if the debtor does not pay the
accumulated interest, and the amount of the principal also has not
become doubled,—all the interest that the creditor obtains is in the
form of the profit derived from the pledge; so that in this case the
man’s interest is to be computed at what he has derived by way of that
profit.

In a case where the pledge is in the form of clothes and other similar
things, which cease to exist, by use, the creditor should ‘*satisfy*’
the debtor ‘*with its price*,’ and himself receive his interest. For, if
he did not pay the price of the pledged article, ‘*he would be a stealer
of the pledge*;’ *i.e.*, ho should ho made to pay that penalty which he
would have had to pay if he had actually stolen an article of the same
kind as the pledge.

‘*Stealer*,’ ‘*stēna*,’ is thief.

Others explain the verse in the following manner:—In the event of
forcible use, there is loss of interest; if the thing is to be used, it
should be so only on payment of its proper price to the debtor; this has
been thus declared—‘the creditor should be made to pay the price of the
thing in gold, in a case where it is used.’

This verse refers to the case where the debtor, at the time of
depositing the pledge, distinctly says—“see that my pledge is not
lost,—do not use it please,—in a few days I shall redeem it,”—and yet
the creditor, not minding this, does make use of the article.—(144)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Clothes etc. are meant, according to Medhātithi;—clothes, ornaments etc.
according to Kullūka and Rāghavānanda;—beds and so forth, according to
Nārāyaṇa, who adds that the ‘value’ stands for “the profit made by the
use of the pledge”—(Buhler).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 24), which adds the
following notes:—If the creditor uses the pledge without the debtor’s
permission, then he loses only a half of the interest; hut if he uses
it, even though actually prohibited to do so, then he loses the whole
interest;—if he does not give up the interest, then he should satisfy
the pledger by paying him the price, fixed by valuation, of the use of
the article pledged.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 76);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(70a), which adds that if the thing has been only half used, and has not
undergone change, then the man loses only half the amount of his
interest, but if the thing becomes changed, then he loses the whole
amount of the interest.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.143-144)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.143].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

विज्ञातारश् च । राज्ञा दण्डः स्यात् । इदं शास्त्रं भोगक्षय एवाधौ समर्थं भवति नान्यत्र । अन्यस् त्व् आह- द्विगुणीभूते ऽर्थे स्वामिनानुज्ञातम् आधिं भुञ्जानो मूलहिरण्येनैव भुञ्जीत । मूलहिरण्यम् एव वा परिगणय्याप्रतिपद्यमानमूल्येन परितोषयेत् । एवं च द्विगुणीभूते हिरण्ये ऽयम् आधिभोगप्रतिषेधः, पूर्वस्मिंश् चार्थ आदाव् एव ॥ ८.१४३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

144	A pledge (to be kept only) must not be used by force, (the creditor), so using it, shall give up his (whole) interest, or, (if it has been spoilt by use) he shall satisfy the (owner) by (paying its) original price; else he commits a theft of the pledge.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/145_Adhish_chopanidhish.md">
<details open><summary><h3>145 आधिश् चोपनिधिश् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

आधिश् चोपनिधिश् चोभौ  
न कालात्ययम् अर्हतः ।  
अवहार्यौ भवेतां तौ  
दीर्घकालम् अवस्थितौ  ॥ ८.१४५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/145_Adhish_chopanidhish.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Pledges and Deposits should not suffer much lapse of time; for being left over for a long time, they would be liable to appropriation.—(145)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**आधिर्** उक्तार्थः । प्रीत्या भुज्यमानः **उपनिधिस्** तु वस्त्रान्तर्हितो[^२०८] न्यासः । तौ चिरकालं न स्थाप्यौ । किं तर्हि, प्राप्ते काले मोक्षणीयौ । आधेर् मोक्षणकालो[^२०९] द्विगुणीभूतं धनम् । तस्यातिक्रमस् तस्मिन्न् अपि काले ऽमोक्षणम् । उपनिधिर् अपि यावता कालेन नास्यावसरो भवति, "मदीयम् एवैतद् भोक्ताहम्" इति, स प्रत्याहरणकालः । ततो ऽधिकः कालः **कालात्ययः** । तं **नार्हतः** स न कर्तव्य इत्य् अर्थः । हेतुम् आह- **अवहार्यौ भवेतां ताव्** इति । तौ हि दीर्घकालम् अवस्थिताव् अप्रत्याह्रीयमाणाव् **अव्यवहार्याव्** इति स्थितम्[^२१०] । तस्माद् द्विगुणीभूतधने आधिमोक्षणे[^२११] प्रयतितव्यम् । सुहृदुपदेशो ऽयम्, न त्व् एवाध्युपनिध्योर्[^२१२] भूयसापि कालेनापहारः[^२१३] । यतो वक्ष्यति "आधिः सीमा बालधनम्" (म्ध् ८.१४९) इति । अतस् तस्यैवायम् अनुवादः ।


[^२१३]:
     DK (1: 386): kālena nāpahāraḥ


[^२१२]:
     M G DK (1: 386): na tv evādhau iti 


[^२११]:
     M G J DK (5: 1186): 'dhimokṣaṇe (I follow DK 1: 386)


[^२१०]:
     DK (1: 386): hāniṃ gacchataḥ (but not DK 5: 1186)


[^२०९]:
     M G J: -kāle


[^२०८]:
     M G J: śāstrāntaravad antarhito (M G antarvitto); I follow DK (1: 386); DK (5: 1186) however suggests: śāstrāntaravaśād anantarhito

<u>अन्ये</u> त्व् आधिविषयम् उपदेशम् इच्छन्ति । यो द्वेषेण द्विगुणीभूते धने कालं क्षपति, "तत् त्रिलाभं[^२१४] धनं नाधिकं वर्धते, न चास्याधुनान्यत्राधानविक्रयौ स्तः, इह वृद्धिम् अयं मा लभताम्" इत्य् अनेन मात्सर्येण, तत्रेदम् उच्यते **अवहार्यौ भवेतां ताव्** इति । अनया बुद्ध्यामोक्षयतः स्वाम्यम् अस्य निवर्तते । यस् तु कथंचिद् असति धने न मोक्षयति तस्य निसर्गविक्रयौ न स्त इति । अथ वापरो ऽर्थो मुखेनोपेक्षयति, परहस्तगतया[^२१५] शङ्कयोच्यते[^२१६] **अवहार्यौ भवेताम्** इति ॥ ८.१४५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Pledges*’—already explained;—‘*Deposit*’—is that which is allowed to
be used through considerations of friendship;— these should not he
allowed to remain for a very long time; they should he redeemed as soon
as the stipulated time arrives.

The time for the redeeming of the pledge is just when the principal,
with accrued interest, has become double; and there is ‘lapse’ of this
time, if the thing is not redeemed then.

For the deposit also, the right time to recover it is before the other
party has occasion to think that the thing belongs to him by reason of
his having the use of it. Beyond this time, there is ‘lapse of time.’

Neither pledges nor deposits ‘*should suffer much lapse of
lime*;’—*i.e*., they should not be allowed to suffer it.

The author explains the reason for this:—‘*They would be liable to
appropriation*’;—if they were allowed to remain longer than the
above-mentioned time, and were not recovered till then, they would he
liable to be appropriated.

For this reason, one should try to redeem the pledge as soon as the
principal has become doubled.

This is merely a friendly advice; as a matter of fact, there can be no
‘appropriation’ of pledges and deposits, by any lapse of time; as it is
going to be declared (in 149) that—‘a pledge..... cannot be lost in
consequence of use’; and it is the same idea that is referred to in the
present text.

Others have held that the present advice refers to *pledges* only,—in
reference to those cases where, even after the principal has become
doubled, the party, through sheer wickedness, goes on wasting time,
under the idea that the principal cannot increase any further,—and it is
not possible to deposit or sell the thing at the time anywhere else,—and
he is urged to this step only through his hatred for the creditor, who
is prevented from earning more interest on his capital. And it is with
reference to such cases that it has been declared that ‘*they should be
appropriated*’ (this being the meaning of the words in this case). That
is, if the man desists from redeeming the pledge with such motives, his
right over the thing ceases. But if one fails to redeem it, for want of
money,—in his case there should be neither ‘transference nor selling’
\[as said above (143)\].

Or the assertion ‘*they become liable to appropriation*’ may he taken as
referring to the case where the debtor desists from redeeming the
pledge, thinking that it lies safest in the custody of another
person.—(145)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Upanidhi*’—‘Anything lent through affection, for use’ (Medhāttlii,
Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘an additional pledge given in
order to complete the security for the loan’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (47a), which explains ‘*ādhi*’
as ‘pledged property’, and ‘*upanidhi*’ as property mortgaged and
allowed to be used, such as agricultural land and so forth it cannot
stand for property in the form of a sealed packet, as such property
cannot be used.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (6.7-8).—‘The pledge shall be restored to the pledgee when the
interest has reached its maximum amount; but he should not use an
immovable pledge without special agreement.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.58).—‘The pledge becomes lost, if it is not redeemed on
the principal becoming doubled; if it had been given for a limited time,
it becomes lost on the lapse of that time; but there is no such losing
in the ease of pledges that have been given for the enjoyment of the
usufruct only.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.415).—‘The following cannot he lost by length of
adverse possession:—Pledge, boundary-land, minor’s property, trust
property, sealed deposit, female slaves, government property and
property of the Vedic scholar.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11, 25, 28).—‘When the time for payment has passed, and
interest has ceased, the creditor shall become the owner of the pledge;
hut till ten days have elapsed, the debtor is entitled to redeem it.
Notice having been given to the debtor’s family, a *pledge to be kept*
may he used after the principal has become doubled, and so may the
*pledge given for* a *fixed period*, on the expiry of that period. When
the principal has been doubled, or the stipulated period has expired, in
the case of the *pledge given for a fixed period*, the creditor becomes
owner of the pledge after having waited for a fortnight. If the debtor
should pay the debt during that interval, he may recover the pledge even
then.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

आधिसादृश्येनोपनिधेर् अपि समानविधित्वाद् अत्रोपदेशः । न चाधेः कालसंरोधे ऽपि निसर्गविक्रयौ स्त इति कृत्वा तस्माद् आधात्रा तन्मोक्षणे यतितव्यम् । कालात्ययेन हि तौ जलाग्निचोरादिभिर् विनाशं गच्छेयाताम् । अथ वा दशवर्षभोगेन । तथा च वक्ष्यति "यति किंचिद् दशवर्षाणि" इति । अथाध्युपनिध्योः को विशेषः । आधिर् हिरण्यभोग्यः; प्रीतिभोग्य उपनिधिः । तथा च वक्ष्यति "निक्षिप्तस्य धनस्याइवं प्रीत्योपनिहितस्य च" इति ॥ ८.१४४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

145	Neither a pledge nor a deposit can be lost by lapse of time; they are both recoverable, though they have remained long (with the bailee).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/146_samprItyA_bhujyamAnAni.md">
<details open><summary><h3>146 सम्प्रीत्या भुज्यमानानि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

संप्रीत्या भुज्यमानानि  
न नश्यन्ति कदा चन ।  
धेनुर् उष्ट्रो वहन्न् अश्वो  
यश् च दम्यः प्रयुज्यते  ॥ ८.१४६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/146_samprItyA_bhujyamAnAni.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Things used through favour are never forfeited; such as a milch cow, a camel, an ox or the animal that is made over for breaking in.—(146)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

प्रीतिर् एव **संप्रीतिः** । तया हेतुभूतयोपभुज्यन्ते धेन्वादयस् ते **न नश्यन्ति** । पूर्वस्वामिसंबन्धहान्या भोक्तुः स्वत्वापत्तिर् नाशः, स धेन्वादीनां प्रीत्या भुज्यमानानां न भवति । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च सर्वस्यैवोपनिधेर् भोगेनापहारो नास्ति । वक्ष्यति "निक्षेपोपनिधिः स्त्रियः"[^२१७] (म्ध् ८.१४९) इति । को विशेषो धेन्वादीनाम् । 


[^२१७]:
     M G J: nikṣepopanidhiś ca yaḥ

<u>उच्यते</u> । यत्र दशवर्षो भोगः, न च स्वरूपनाशः, तत्र "यत् किंचित्" (म्ध् ८.१४७) इति सामान्यवचनेन प्राप्ते ऽपहारे उपनिधेः प्रतिषेधः । देन्वादीनां तूपनिधित्वम् एव नास्ति, अतः प्रतिषेधस्य नायं विषय इति स्याद् आशङ्का । आधाननिमित्तो[^२१८] हि धेनुशब्दो यदि परसंवत्सरे धेनुः स्यात्, परत उपसर्या यदि गर्भम् आदध्याद् धेनुत्वम् आपद्येत, तदा जनयेद् आशङ्काम् "अस्यैवेयम्, न देवदत्तस्य" । यतः प्रष्ठौही न भोग्या, प्रीतिसंभोग्यश् चोपनिधिः । येन स्वकैर् भोग्यं परिपाल्य[^२१९] पुनर् भुज्यमानं दृष्टम् । न पुनर् उपनिधेर् एतद् रूपम् । भोग्यो ह्य् उपनिधिः । असद्भावाद् भोग्यस्य च कीदृशगुणम् उपनिधित्वम् । उपनिधेश् चासौ प्रतिषेधः । तस्माद् उपनिधिरूपातिक्रमाद् असति तस्मिन् प्रतिषेधे यत्नान्तरम् उक्तम् ।   
**उष्ट्रा**दीनाम् अपि दशवर्षाणि भुज्यमानानाम् अवस्थान्तरापत्तिः । अतस् तत्रापि नोपनिधित्वम् । **वहन्न्** इति <u>केचिद्</u> अश्वविशेषणं मन्यन्ते । वृषस्य नायं विधिः । <u>अपरे</u> तु गर्दभाश्वतरार्थं मन्यन्ते । **दम्यो** बलीवर्दः । **प्रयुज्यते** वाहनार्थं यो दीयते ।


<u>अन्ये</u> तु पुनः प्रतिषेधं विकल्पार्थं मन्यन्ते । एतद् व्यतिरेकेणान्यस्योपनिधेर् अस्ति कादाचित्को ऽपहारः । तेन यद् वस्त्रादि प्रीत्या भुज्यते,[^२२०] यच् च[^२२१] परिक्षीणम्, तत्रास्त्य् एवापहारः[^२२२] । न हि प्रीत्या गृहीते वस्त्रे परिक्षीणे[^२२३] स्वामिनोपेक्ष्यते[^२२४] पुनर् अवसरो ऽस्ति- "देहि मे वस्त्रं विनाशितं त्वया तत्समेन मूल्येन संसाधय"[^२२५] इति ॥ ८.१४६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Favour*’—friendliness. When such things as the ‘*Cow*’ and the rest
are being used solely through the favour of the owner, they do not
become ‘*forfeited*.’ ‘Forfeiture’ means the passing of the ownership of
the former owner and the coming in of that of the person using them. And
such ‘forfeiture’ does not take place in the case of the cow and other
things being used through favour.

“As a matter of fact, in the case of all *deposits*, there is no
forfeiture by mere using,—as is going to be declared under 149
below—wbat is the special feature there in the case of the cow and other
things (that they should be separately specified)?”

Our answer is as follows:—The denial (in 149) of forfeiture in regard to
deposits is in view of its possibility in accordance with the general
law of forfeiture laid down in verse 147, which would be applicable to
those cases also when the thing has been used for ten years without its
losing its former shape.—So far as the cow and other animals are
concerned, they cannot he articles of ‘deposit’; and hence people might
be led to think that these do not come within the said prohibition (in
149). (Hence the necessity of emphasising the non-forfeiture of these
separately.)

The name ‘milch cow’ is based upon the cow *giving milk*; this condition
can last at best for one year; after which, becoming fit for the bull,
she would cease to be ‘milch’ if she became pregnant; and after this,
there might be an idea that she belongs to this person (who is keeping
her) and not to Devadatta (to whom she really belonged); because what
had been given by the latter for the use of the former was the cow
calved for the ñrst time; and Devadatta allowed the man to use her and
still continued to see her being used, in a form which is not the same
as that of the animal that had been given in ‘deposit’; and hence the
‘deposit’ is that which is to ho used, and the use is not of that thing;
under the circumstances, what sort of a ‘deposit’ would it be? And as
the prohibition (under 149) pertains to ‘deposits,’ and the cow in
question has ceased to be a ‘deposit’,—it was necessary to make a
separate effort for precluding her forfeiture.

As regards the camel and other animals mentioned, after they have been
used for ten years, they become entirely changed in shape. So that-
these also would cease to be ‘deposits’ (in the true sense of the term).

‘*Vahan*,’ (‘ox’) has been taken by some as a participial adjective
(meaning ‘riding’) qualifying the word ‘*horse*,’; they hold that what
is here laid down does not apply to the *ox*. Others again take it as
standing for the donkey, the mule and other beasts of burden.

‘*For breaking in*’—ox and other animals—‘*made over*’—given for that
purpose. Others hold that the present verse serves the purpose of
implying the optional character of the prohibition. In the case of
‘deposits’ other than those enumerated here, there is sometimes
‘forfeiture.’ for instance, when clothes are used through favour and
become worn out, there is ‘forfeiture.’ for when a new clothing has been
handed over for use, and it becomes worn out by use, there can be no
opportunity for the former owner to say—‘Let me have my clothing,—if it
has become worn out, let me have its price and thereby redeem the
deposit.’—(146)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra p. 157).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bṛhaspati* (9.11).—‘A house, field, commodity or other property held by
a person other than the owner, is not lost to the owner by mere adverse
possession, if the possessor stands to him in the relation of a friend,
relative or kinsman.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

आध्युपनिध्योः प्रकरणाद् एतद् ग्रहणम् । उक्तं हि "आधिश् चोपनिधिश् चोभौ न कालात्ययम् अर्हतः" । अथ वा संप्रीतिभोगवचनाद् उपनिधिर् अयम्, नाधिः । तथा च प्रीत्योपनिहितस्य चेत्य् एवंविधम् उपनिधिं वक्ष्यति । संप्रीत्या भुज्यमानो धेनूष्ट्राः वहन्तश् चाश्वादयः स्वं स्वम् अर्थं प्रयच्छन्ति । यश् च दम्यः प्रयुज्यते अवहन्न् अपि । एते न नश्यन्ति कदाचिद् अतिभोगेन । अथ वा संप्रीत्या भुज्यमानानि गृहादीन्य् उच्यन्ते । एभ्यस् त्व् अन्ये धेन्वादयो ऽपि प्रीतिभोग्या[ः नश्यन्ति ॥ ८.१४५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

146	Things used with friendly assent, a cow, a camel, a riding-horse, and (a beast) made over for breaking in, are never lost (to the owner).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/147_yat_kim.md">
<details open><summary><h3>147 यत् किम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यत् किं चिद् दशवर्षाणि  
संनिधौ प्रेक्षते धनी ।  
भुज्यमानं परैस् तूष्णीं  
न स तल् लब्धुम् अर्हति  ॥ ८.१४७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/147_yat_kim.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Whatever thing the owner meekly sees being used by others in his presence, for ten years,—that thing he does not deserve to recover.—(147)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**यत् किंचिद् भुज्यमानम्** इत्य् व्यवस्थितेन[^२२६] संबन्धः । **धनीति** संनिधानात् सामान्यनिर्देशे ऽपि भुज्यमानधनोपेक्षणं[^२२७] प्रतीयते । **यत् किंचिद्** इति दासीदासासारभाण्डादि[^२२८] सर्वं ग्राहयति । न हि तल् लोके ऽत्यन्तं धनम् इति प्रसिद्धम्, गोभूहिरण्याद्य् एव महार्घं धनम् इति प्रसिद्धतरम् । तेनायम् अत्र वाक्यार्थः । **यत् किंचिद्** द्रव्यं परेण **भुज्यमानं** **धनी** धनस्वामी **दशवर्षाणि** यावत् **प्रेक्षते,** न किंचिद् वक्ति, न राजनि व्यवहरति, न कुलसमक्षं भोक्तारं वदति "मदीयम् एतत् किम् इति त्वया स्वयं भुज्यते" इति, **स** दशभ्यो वर्षेभ्य उत्तरकालं **न** **तल् लब्धुं** स्वीकर्तुम् **अर्हति** । निवर्तते ऽस्य स्वत्वम्[^२२९] इति यावत् । प्रेक्षणेन ज्ञेयतामात्रम् उच्यते, न प्रत्यक्षतैव । **संनिधाव्** इति वक्ष्यामः । 


[^२२९]:
     M G J: svam; DK (1: 386) svāmyam; I follow DK 5: 1187


[^२२८]:
     DK (1:386): dāsadāsīsārāsārabhāṇḍādi


[^२२७]:
     DK (5: 1187) suggests: dhanāpekṣaṇaṃ


[^२२६]:
     M G: avasthitena

**परैः,** न ज्ञातिसंबन्धिभिः । तथा च स्मृत्यन्तरम् "ज्ञातिसंबन्धिभिर् विना" इति ।


- संबन्धिबान्धवैश् चैव भुक्तं यज् जातिभिस् तथा ।

- न तद् भोगो[^२३०] निवर्तेत भोगम् अन्यत्र कल्पयेत् ॥


[^२३०]:
     DK (1: 386): bhogān

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;तद् अयुक्तम् । अव्यवस्थैवं सति स्यात् । "के ज्ञातयः के वा संबन्धिनः" इति । संबन्धमात्रग्रहणे न किंचिद् व्यावर्त्यम् । तस्माद् येनान्यदीयं भुज्यते स एवं[^२३१] भवति । किं तु तथा सति परशब्दो ऽनुवादमात्रम् अनर्थः, कस्यापि न परव्यपदेशः । स निरस्यते,[^२३२] यथा भार्यापती पितापुत्राव् इति । तत्र ह्य् आत्मन्य् अपि व्यपदेशो ऽस्ति "अर्धो ह वा एष आत्मनो यज् जाया" (श्ब् ५.२.१.१०), "आत्मा वै पुत्र नामासि" (श्ब् १४.९.४.२६) इति । तेन दम्पत्योः पितृपुत्रयोर् न भोगाभोगौ कारणम् । तेषाम् अपि विभक्तधनानां भोगकाले प्राप्ते ऽभोगो बाधक एव । भार्याया अपि स्त्रीधने भर्तृसकाशाद् गृहीते बन्धेन पत्युर् भोगे नासिद्धिः । सा ह्य् आत्यन्तपरवती । नोभयोर् विभागो ऽस्ति । स्त्रीधनम् अपि तेनैव तस्याः परिपालनीयम् । "राजस्त्रीश्रोत्रियद्रव्याद्[^२३३] अन्यत्र" इति च पट्ःयते । 


[^२३३]:
     MG: rājñā; J: rājā (all outside the compound)


[^२३२]:
     DK: anarthakaḥ syāt | yasya parasyāpi na paravyapadeśaḥ sa nirasyate


[^२३१]:
     DK (1: 386): sa para eva

- एवम् अनेन स्वामिन उपेक्षमाणस्य स्वाम्यहानिर् उक्ता ॥ ८.१४७ ॥

_कस्य तर्हि तत् संभवतीत्य् एवम् अर्थम् उत्तरश्लोकः ।_ "न स तल् लब्धुम् अर्हति" इत्य् अस्य शेषः- "अजडश् चेद् अपोगण्डः**"** इति[^२३४] ।


[^२३४]:
     M G DK (1: 384): yadi connection it with jaḍaḥ at the beginning of the following commentary.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Whatever thing being used*,’ etc.—such is the construction, ‘*being
used*’ being brought back to the beginning.

‘*Owner*;’—though this general term has been used, yet the person meant
is the owner of the thing whose use is being ignored.

‘*Whatever thing*’—includes all kinds of property, slaves, slave-girls,
utensils large and small, and so forth; though all this is not usually
spoken of as ‘*dhana*,’ ‘property,’ ‘wealth,’—which name is applied to
gold, silver and other valuable articles.

The moaning of the sentence thus is this:—“When the owner of a property
sees, for ten years, a certain property of his being used by another
person,—and says nothing,—*i.e*., does not file a suit before the king,
nor says to the user before his family ‘how is it that you are using
this thing which belongs to me?’—such a man, after the lapse of ten
years, does not deserve to ‘*recover*’—obtain possession of—that
thing;—*i.e*., his ownership entirely ceases.”

What is meant by ‘*seeing*’ is *knowledge*, and not actual *seeing with
the eyes*; which latter is expressed by the term ‘*in his presence*.’

‘*By others*’—is explained by some to mean *not by collaterals or
relatives*; another *Smṛti* text adding these ‘collaterals and
relatives’ as exceptions to the present rule:—‘when a thing is used by
relatives and collaterals, the ownership does not cease.’

This however is not right; as this explanation would make the rule
indefinite; it being uncertain who are to be regarded as ‘collaterals’
and ‘relatives.’ If ‘relationship’ in general were meant, then there
would be no one left (who would not hear some sort of relationship to
the man). Consequently the text must be taken to mean that the rule hero
laid down applies to all cases where some one else uses a thing
belonging ṭo another person.

In this case however the term ‘others’ would be merely re-iterative, and
as such superfluous. For there is no person to whom the term ‘other’
could be applicable. The wife, the father and the son are all spoken of
as ‘one’s own self;’ specially in such texts as—‘the wife is the half of
one’s self,’ ‘it is one’s own self that is called the *son*.’ Hence
between husband and wife, or between father and son, mere *using* cannot
he regarded as a ground of ownership. In fact in their case also, if
they are separated, when the time of using has arrived, if one does not
use it, this fact becomes a precluder of his ownership. In the case of
the wife’s dowry, if it has been pledged by the husband, her ownership
does not cease by *using*, so long as the husband is alive, and the
reason for this is that she is entirely dependent upon him, and there is
no absolute separation between them; her dowry also has to be looked
after by the husband; and the law also (verse 149) is found to make an
exception in favour of the property of the king, the Vedic scholar, and
women.

The present verse having described the loss of ownership of the owner
who ignores adverse possession, the next verse proceeds to show to whom
the said property passes over.—(147)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 222), which adds the
following explanation:—‘If the rightful owner of a property looks upon
his property being used by another, without his presenting it to him as
a friendly gift, or some such thing,—and does not speak out,
complain,—for ten years, then he is no longer entitled to receive it;
*i.e*., his ownership over it ceases’;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p.
101),—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 65b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.147-148)  
**

*Gautama* (12.37-38).—‘The property of a person who is neither an idiot
nor a minor, having been used by strangers before his eyes for ten
years, comes to belong to him who uses it; but not if it is used by
Vedic Scholars, ascetics or royal officials.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.17)—‘Whatever property belonging to one has been enjoyed
by another person for ten years continuously is lost to the owner.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.24).—‘If a man sees his landed property being enjoyed
by others, and does not complain about it, he loses it after twenty
years of such possession: in the case of other properties, ownership
lapses after only ten years’ adverse possession.’

*Śukranīti* (1.5.443-46).—‘The property which is ceaselessly enjoyed for
sixty years, even without title, cannot be claimed hack by anybody. The
following cannot he destroyed by length of adverse possession: pledge,
boundary-land, minor’s property, trust property, sealed deposit, female
slaves, government property and property of the Vedic Scholar. The owner
who is indifferent to his property and does not complain about
trespasses on his property, cannot, get hack by law-suit that property,
on the expiry of the above period.’

*Nārada* (1.78-80).—‘If a man is foolish enough to allow his goods to he
enjoyed by strangers in his own eyesight, they shall belong to the
possessor, even in the presence, and during the life-time, of the
rightful owner. Whatever the owner looking on quietly suffers to be
enjoyed by strangers for ten years, though he is present, that cannot be
recovered by him. If he is neither an idiot nor a minor, and the
enjoyment takes place before his eyes, his right to it is extinct by
law, and the possessor is allowed to keep it.’

*Bṛhaspati* (9.7, 9, 10).—‘He, whose possession has been continuous from
the time of occupation, and has never been interrupted for a period of
thirty years, cannot he deprived of such property. He who does not raise
a protest when a stranger is giving away his landed property in his
sight, cannot again recover that estate, even though he he possessed of
a written title to it. Possession held by three generations produces
ownership for strangers, no doubt, when they are related to one another
in the degree of a *Sapiṇḍa*: it does not stand good in the case of
*Sakulyas*.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 632).—‘If the landed property of a man has been
enjoyed by others for twenty years, his ownership to it is not
restored.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रीतिरहितं यति किंचिद् ॥ ८.१४६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

147	(But in general) whatever (chattel) an owner sees enjoyed by others during ten years, while, though present, he says nothing, that (chattel) he shall not recover.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/148_ajaDash_ched.md">
<details open><summary><h3>148 अजडश् चेद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अजडश् चेद् अपोगण्डो  
विषये चाऽस्य भुज्यते ।  
भग्नं तद् व्यवहारेण  
भोक्ता तद् द्रव्यम् अर्हति [मेधातिथिपाठः - तद् धनम् अर्हति]  ॥ ८.१४८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/148_ajaDash_ched.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the owner is neither an idiot nor a minor, and the property is used in his own country,—it becomes frustrated in law, and the user becomes entitled to the property.—(148)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^२३५]:
     M G DK (1: 384; 5.1188): dravyam

**जडः** अप्रतिपत्तिमान् । **पोगण्डो** बालः । प्राक् षोडशाद् बालः प्रोगण्ड इत्य् उच्यते । एतच् च स्वधनसंरक्षणासामर्थ्यकारणानाम् अन्येषाम् अप्य् उपलक्षणार्थम् । मद्यद्यूतविशक्तता, दीर्घरोगगृहीतता, तपःस्वाध्यायैकपरत्वम्, व्यवहारेष्व् अनैपुण्यम्, वागिन्द्रियाभावः, बाधिर्यम् — यस्यैते ऽसामर्थ्यहेतवः सन्ति न तदीये धने भोक्तुर् बहुतरेणापि कालेन स्वत्वम् आपद्यते । **विषये चास्य भुज्यते** । **अस्येति** धनिनः प्रत्यवमर्शः । **विषयः** काश्मीराणां कश्मीरः, पञ्चालानां च पञ्चालः[^२३६] । यदि भोक्ता च स्वामी चैकस्मिन्न् एव देशे वसेत् तथापि शक्तिविहीनस्यायं व्यवहारः । अत्रापि व्याख्याने प्रपञ्च एवायम्,[^२३७] अजडापोगण्डग्रहणस्य प्रदर्शनार्थतया व्याख्यातत्वात् । तेन यस्य जानतो यदुपेक्षाकारणं न संभाव्यते तदीयं धनं दश वर्षाणि भुञ्जानो भोक्तैवार्हति, तस्य तत्स्वम् इत्य् अवगन्तव्यम् । 


[^२३७]:
     DK (1:384): vasetāṃ tathāpi samānadeśavāsino 'pi svāmino na śaktivihīnasyāpahāraḥ


[^२३६]:
     M G: kaśmīrapañcālānāṃ ca pancālā; DK (1: 384): kaśmīrāḥ, and pañcālāḥ; DK (1: 384) adds: dūradeśeṣūṣite svāmini bhoktur bhogāsiddhiḥ | tad uktaṃ "saṃnidhau" (MDh 8.147) iti, tasyaivāyaṃ prapañco vijñeya iti (this passage is omitted also in DK 5: 1188)

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च न भोगात् स्वत्वं युक्तम् । स्वत्वे सति भोगो युक्तः । भोगाद् धि स्वत्वे ऽव्यवस्था स्यात् । यश् चायम् अवधिर् दश वर्षाणीति, स स्मृत्यन्तरेण न सर्वस्मिन् धन इष्यते । किं तर्हि, "पश्यतो ऽब्रुवतो भूमेर् हानिर् विंशतिवार्षिकी" (य्ध् २.२४) इति । अन्ये तु विंशतिवार्षिकेणापि भोगेन न भूमेर् अपहारम् इच्छन्ति त्रिपुरुषैव भुक्तिः प्रमाणम् इति वदन्तः (च्ड़्। न्स्म् १.८१) । अन्ये तु कदाचिद् आगमरहितेन भोगे न[^२३८] स्वाम्यम् अनुमन्यन्ते । एवं ह्य् आहुः- 


[^२३८]:
     DK (5: 1188) omit: na bhūmer apahāram icchanti tripuruṣaiva bhuktiḥ pramāṇam iti vadantaḥ | anye tu kadācid āgamarahitena bhogena (metathesis)

- अनागमं च यो भुङ्क्ते बहून्य् अब्दशतान्य् अपि" । (न्स्म् १.७६* अद्दितिओन्)

तथा-

- संभोगो यत्र दृश्येत न दृश्येतागमः क्वचित् ।

- आगमः कारणं तत्र न संभोग इति स्थितिः ॥ (म्ध् ८.२००)

त्रिपुरुषभुक्तिवादिनस् तावद् एवं पठन्ति ।

- यद् विनागमम् अत्यन्तं भुक्तं पूर्वैस् त्रिभिर् भवेत् ।

- न तच् छक्यम् अपाहर्तुं क्रमात् त्रिपुरुषागतम् ॥ (न्स्म् १.८१)

अस्यायम् अर्थः- आगमो दानादिः । असति तस्मिन् यद् भुक्तं पितृपितामहप्रपितामहैस् तच् चतुर्थस्य सिध्यति, न तु विंशत्या वर्षैः । तत्रान्यत्रोक्तम् ।

- आदौ तु कारणं दानं मध्ये भुक्तिस् तु सागमा ।

- अन्ते तु बुक्तिर् एवैका प्रमाणं स्थावरे भवेत् ॥

तृतीयस्य बोगात् सिद्धिः, न प्रथमद्वितीययोः पितृपितामहयोः । अस्यापि न विंशतिवर्षैर् भोगः प्रमाणम् । अन्ये त्व् आगमरहितस्य वार्षशतिकस्यापि भोग्यस्याप्रामाण्यम् अनुमन्यन्ते । तथा चाहुः ।

- अनागमं तु यो भुङ्क्ते बहून्य् अब्दशतान्य् अपि ।

- चौरदण्डेन तं पापं दण्डयेत् पृथिवीपतिः ॥

- भोगं केवलतो[^२३९] यस् तु कीर्तयेन् नागमं क्वचित् ।


[^२३९]:
     M G DK (1: 384): bhogakevalatāṃ

- आगमः कारणं तत्र न संभोग इति स्थितिः[^२४०] ॥ (न्स्म् १.७६* अद्दितिओन्)


[^२४०]:
     DK: bhogacchalāpadeśena vijñeyaḥ sa tu taskaraḥ

- [^२४१] । यत्[^२४२] तु "बहून्य् अब्दशतानि" इति, तद् आहर्तृविषयम्[^२४३] आत्मीयम् एव बोगम् चिरकालत्वे हेतुम्[^२४४] आह- तस्य पितृपितामहभोगेन विना न सिद्ध्यतीत्य् अर्थः । कथं पुनर् एकस्यानेकाब्दशतो भोगः पुरुषस्य । नैष दोषः । चिरकालप्रतिपादनपरा बहुत्ववचनाः शतं सहस्रम् इत्यादयः शब्दाः । यथा "शतायुर् वै पुरुषः शतवीर्यः शतेन्द्रियः" (ऐत्ब् २.१७) इति । एतद् उक्तं भवति- विंशतिवार्षिकाद् भोगाद् अधिकाद् अपि न प्रथमभोक्तुर् भोगात् स्वत्वसिद्धिः । अर्थात् पुत्रस्यापि[^२४५] न सिद्ध्यतीति यथाश्रुतम् एव । न हि बहुष्व् अब्दशतेष्व् आगमस्मरणं संभवति । ततश् च चिरन्तनदेवायतनब्राह्मणमठग्रामा राजभिर् अपह्रियेरन् । लेख्यशासनम् अपि राजाधिकृतलेखकलिखितम् इति चिरन्तनेषु नैव प्रत्यभिज्ञायेत । कूटशासनम् अपि संभाव्येत । तस्माच् चिरन्तनो भोगः स्वत्वकार्यः[^२४६] स्वत्वस्य दानाद्यागमसंभावनाया[^२४७] ज्ञापको हेतुः, न तु कारकः । अत एव भुक्तिः प्रमाणमध्ये पठिता- 


[^२४७]:
     M G: dānādyārāma-


[^२४६]:
     DK (5: 1181) omits: svatvakāryaḥ


[^२४५]:
     M G DK (1: 384): atha vā tatparasyāpi


[^२४४]:
     DK (1: 384): cirakālasiddhihetum


[^२४३]:
     DK (1: 384) adds: yad


[^२४२]:
     M G J: yā


[^२४१]:
     DK (1: 384) adds: ucyate | yad atra cedam uktaṃ bhogo naiva pramāṇam iti tad ayuktam | sarvasmṛtikāraira tripuruṣabhogasya prāmāṇyenābhyanugatatvāt

- लिखितं साक्षिणो भुक्तिः प्रमाणं त्रिविधं स्मृतम् । इति । (न्स्म् १.६५)

न तु स्वत्वकारणमध्ये- "सप्तवित्तागमाः" (म्ध् १०.११५) इति, "श्रुतशौर्यतपःकन्या" (न्स्म् १.४१) इत्यादौ च । अथ वा यत्र बलादि भोगकारणं संभाव्यते तद्विषयम् एतत् "अनागमम्" (न्स्म् १.७६* अद्दितिओन्) इत्यादि । अत्रैव[^२४८] प्रकरणे पठितम्-


[^२४८]:
     M G: tv atraiva

- अन्वाहितं हृतं[^२४९] न्यस्तं बलावष्टब्धयाचितम् ।


[^२४९]:
     M G: yācitānvāhitaṃ

- अप्रत्यक्षं च यद् भुक्तं षड् एतान्य् आगमं विना ॥ इति । (न्स्म् १.७९)

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च "आधि सीमा" (म्ध् ८.१४९) इत्य् अनेनैवायम् अर्थः सिद्धः ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;न,[^२५०]<u> उक्तस्य</u> कालस्य त्रिपुरुषं यावद् भुङ्क्ते स एवार्थः । अयं तु तत उत्तरकालम् अपि निवृत्त्यर्थम् आरभते । तथा च "बहून्य् अब्दशतानि" इत्य् अत्र वचनम् । "अन्वाहितम्" यत् प्रकटम्, अन्यथा प्रदर्श्यान्तर्हितम् अन्यद् अवस्थाप्यते । "हृतम्"[^२५१] रात्रौ संधिभेदछलादिना । "बलावष्टब्धम्"[^२५२] प्रसह्येति शेषः[^२५३] । शिष्टं प्रसिद्धम् ।


[^२५३]:
     M G DK: viśeṣaḥ


[^२५२]:
     M G: balāvaṣṭabdhatvaṃ


[^२५१]:
     M G DK (1: 385): bandhopāhṛtam


[^२५०]:
     DK (5: 1181) omits: na

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;यदि त्रिपुरुषा भुक्तिः प्रमाणं कस् तर्हि[^२५४] "पश्यतो ऽब्रुवतो भूमेर् हानिर् विंशतिवार्षिकी" (य्ध् २.२४) इत्य् अस्यार्थः । 


[^२५४]:
     M G DK add: yad uktam

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;केचिद् आहुः । इयन्तं[^२५५] कालं भुञ्जानस्य सति लेख्यदोषादौ शक्ताभियुक्तादिकृतत्वं[^२५६] क्रमाक्षरविलोपाद्[^२५७] असत्यनयाभ्याम् अधमर्ण[^२५८] उच्यते । संदिग्धरूपम् अपि लेख्यम् इयता भोगकालेन निश्चीयते । 


[^२५८]:
     The reading here is distorted. DK (1: 385) puts an elipsis after -vilopā, and reads: ity evam artham eva ucyate.


[^२५७]:
     M G J: -vilepād; DK (1: 3845-vilopā


[^२५६]:
     M G J: saktā-


[^२५५]:
     M G J: kiyantaṃ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये त्व् आहुः । यत्रैव[^२५९] ताम् एव भूमिम्[^२६०] एकस्य बन्धायार्पयति, ताम् एव चापरस्य । एकस्याद्यं प्रमाणम्, अपरस्य पाश्चात्यम् । तत्र सत्य् अपि प्रामाण्यस्याद्यत्वे पाश्चात्यो विंशतिवार्षिको भोगो बलवान् । 


[^२६०]:
     M G: bhūmir


[^२५९]:
     DK (1: 385): yatraika eva 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;एतच् चायुक्तम्, येनैव स्वीकृतो बन्धस् तथैव सः, "आधेः स्वीकरणात् सिद्धिः" (य्ध् २.६२) इति वचनात् । स्वीकारश् च भूमेर् भोगाभिलाषैव[^२६१] तेनेदृशे विषये स्वल्पेनापि कालेन[^२६२] बन्धसिद्धिः । एतद् एवाभिप्रेत्योक्तम्-


[^२६२]:
     M G: bhogam iti kālena; DK (1: 385): bhogakālena (DK 5: 1189 follows the edition)


[^२६१]:
     M G: bhogābhilāṣeva; DK (1: 385): bhogābhiṣvaṅga (DK 5: 1189 follows the edition)

- विद्यमाने ऽपि लिखिते जीवत्स्व् अपि हि साक्षिषु ।

- विशेषतः स्थावराणां यन् न भुक्तं न तत् स्थिरम् ॥ इति । (न्स्म् १.६८)

विशेषग्रहणं गवाश्वादाव् अभुजमाने ऽपि नासिद्धिः, यतस् ते नावशयं भोग्याः । तथा हि भवेत्-[^२६३] गौर् गर्भं न[^२६४] गृह्णाति, कीदृशो ऽस्या अतो भोगः । भूमिस् तु सर्वदा फलदेति भोगलाभम् अन्तरेण न बन्धत्वसिद्धिः । तत्रापि कथंचिद् उपेक्ष्यमाणस्य तु यच्छतः प्रथमभोगकाल एव यदि द्वितीयेनाधिग्राहकेण संनिकर्षादिना स्वीकृतः स्यात्, इतरेण वाद्यप्रमाणवता देशविप्रकर्षात् कार्यव्यासङ्गाद् वा न स्वीकृतस् तदा विचार्यते नेयता तदसिद्धिः । यदा तु गृहीताधिर् एव समनन्तरं राज्ञा प्रव्राजितो महान्तं व्याधिम् आससाद, न वास्यान्यो ऽर्थरक्षाद्यधिकृतः कश्चिद् अस्ति, स चिरेणाप्य् आगतः सिद्धाव् अपि निरुपधिप्रमाणकाले लभत एव स्वीकृतम् अप्य् अन्येन ।


[^२६४]:
     M G DK (1: 3845omit: na


[^२६३]:
     M G DK (1: 385): bhavad

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु, भ्रातॄणां न्यूनाधिकविभक्तानां पुनर्विभागः समीकरणार्थ उक्तः । स विंशतिवर्षेभ्य ऊर्ध्वं नास्तीत्य् एवमर्थम् इदम् आहुः । एतावन्मात्रफलत्वे तत्रैवाभिधानम् उचितम् । सामान्याभिधानं तु प्रकरणोत्कर्षेणान्यविषयताम् अपि ज्ञापयति ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अपरे तु, "खिलीभूता भूमिर् येन क्षेत्रीकृता तत्र भूमिस्थानोपभोग उक्तः । स चेद् एतावन्ति वर्षाणि निगृहीतस् तथा सूत्रक्षेत्रयन्त्रैश् च स्वामी भूमित्वेन स च विषयः "[^२६५] इत्य् एवम् आहुः । 


[^२६५]:
     Edition follows M G J DK (5: 1189); DK (1: 385): nigṛhītaḥ, tataḥ kṣetrapitaiva svāmīty evamādir viśeṣaviṣayaḥ (the reading here appears to be corrupt).

- इहभवन्तस् त्व् आहुः- यौ समानदेशौ समानसामर्थ्यौ समानस्वभावौ समानधनौ तुल्यप्रयोजनाव्[^२६६] अपरस्परसंबन्धिनौ तयोर् अन्यतरस्येतरेण भुज्यमानम् इयन्तम् अवधिं समक्षम् उपेक्षमाणस्यास्य नैव[^२६७] स्थावरेषु स्वाम्यम् । किं तु त्रिपुरुषभुक्तिविरोधात् सर्वेण सर्वम्[^२६८] । विरुद्धे ह्य् एते स्मृती । ते न किम् अपि कल्पनम् अर्हतः, येनास्ति च स्वाम्यम्, नास्ति चेत् किंचिद् युज्यते । तत एवं[^२६९] व्यवस्था युक्ता । यद्य् अपि सत्वागमकारणानि बहूनि सन्ति दानविक्रयबन्धकारणादीनि, तथाप्य् अनुपलभ्यमानकारणविशेषे विंशतिवार्षिकभोगे ऽनन्तरादर्शितविषये बन्धरूपताभ्युपगन्तुं युक्ता । चञ्चलं भोग्यं च स्वत्वम् । वस्त्वपचये तत्प्रत्याहर्तुं लभ्यते । ततश् च त्रिपुरुषा भुक्तिः सर्वस्य स्वत्वम्[^२७०] आपादयति । दानविक्रयसंभावना तु[^२७१] यावत्य् एव सा वार्षिकी भविष्यति । विंशतिवार्षिके[^२७२] भोगे न किंचिद् अनुपपन्नम्[^२७३] । 


[^२७३]:
     M G J DK (5: 1190): anupapannā


[^२७२]:
     M G: -vārṣikeṣu; DK (1: 385) add: tu


[^२७१]:
     M G omit: tu; DK (5: 1190) ca; DK (1: 385): -bhāvanayā


[^२७०]:
     M G DK (1: 385): svam


[^२६९]:
     M G J DK (1: 385): eva (I follow DK 5: 1181 suggestion)


[^२६८]:
     DK (1: 385): -virodhāt na sarveṇa sarvaṃ samarthanīyam


[^२६७]:
     M G: upekṣamāṇasyāsyaiva; upekṣamāṇasyāstyeva


[^२६६]:
     M G DK (1: 385): tatprayojanāv

यत्रोभाव् अप्य् आगमम् अन्तरेण भोगमात्रबलात् प्रवृत्तौ तत्र पूर्वो भोगश् चिरन्तनो ऽपि विंशतिवर्षभोग्येन[^२७४] सांप्रतिकेन निरुपाधिना बाध्यते । दण्डपूर्विकयात्रागत[^२७५] इयत्कालो भोगः त्रिपुरुषागताया भुक्तेर् भाधक इत्य् उक्तं भवति ।  

**भग्नं तद् व्यवहारेणेति** । व्यवहारग्रहणं धर्मनिवृत्त्यर्थम् । तेन यदि कथंचिज् जानीते तदा जीयेत । तदापि त्व् अनेन[^२७६] उपनिधिभोगज्ञापने प्रमाणं नास्ति, तेन व्यवहरतो जीयन्त्,। तद्धर्मो नास्ति, तादृशेन भोगेनापि हतः[^२७७] इति, तिष्ठत्व् एतत् ॥ ८.१४८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verso is supplementary to what has been said (in the preceding
verse) regarding the man not deserving to recover the property—‘*if he
is neither an idiot nor a minor*.’ One who is devoid of intelligence is
called as ‘*idiot*;’ and one who is still a child is a‘*minor*;’ one who
has not reached his sixteenth year is called a ‘*minor*.’

What is mentioned here is only by way of illustration, standing, as it
docs, for those conditions that make one unable to protect his own
interests; such conditions for instance, as disability due to wine or
gambling, protracted illness, being taken up entirely by austerities and
study, want of business-capacity, deafness.

In the case of the property of persons suffering from such disabilities,
even prolonged using does not create ownership in the person using it.

‘*Is used in his country*’.—The term ‘*his*’ refers to the actual owner.
The ‘*country*’ of the Kaśmiri people is Kaśmir, that of the inhabitant
of Pañcāla is Pañcāla. The sense is that—‘if both the owner and the user
are inhabitants of the same country.’

What is meant is that the rule laid down applies to the case of persons
suffering from a disability; all the rest are mere details in the
explanation; as it has been already pointed out that the mention of the
‘idiot’ and the ‘minor’ is merely indicative. Hence the sense is
that—‘in cases where it is possible for the owner to know that his
property is being enjoyed by another, if the latter continues to enjoy
it for ten years, then he becomes entitled to it,—*i.e*., the ownership
passes over to him.’

*Objection*.—(A) “It is not right that *enjoyment* or *possession*
should lead to ownership; on the contrary, it is *ownership* that leads
to *possession*. If *possession* were to lead to *ownership*, there
would be confusion. (B) further, as regards the limit of tea years that
has been set forth, other Smṛti-texts do not admit this in the case of
all kinds of property. For instance—‘in the case of landed property
ownership ceases after *twenty years*, if the owner sees it being
enjoyed and says nothing’—says Yājñavalkya (*Vyavahāra*, 24). Others
again do not admit the passing away of ownership even after twenty years
of adverse possession. They say—‘If one enjoys, without title, a
property even for hundreds of years, he should be punished by the king
with the penalty due to thieves’ (Nārada, 87);—and again, ‘Where
possession is found, but no title for it, the rule is that it is the
title, and not the possession, that should form the ground of
ownership.’ (Nārada, 84).”

Those who hold to the view of possession for three generations (leading
to the passing over of ownership) quote the following text—‘Even in the
absence of title, if a property has been in total possession for three
generations, it cannot be recovered, having passed from one generation
to another for three generations’ (Nārada, 91). And the meaning of this
is as follows:—‘Authority’ means a deed of gift or some such
document;—in the absence of such proof, what has been enjoyed by the
father, grandfather, and great-grandfather, becomes the property of the
fourth generation; and it is not so after twenty years only. Elsewhere
again we read—

‘The best authority consists in a gift-deed, possession accompanied by
title is the second, and possession is the last,—in connection with
immovable property.’ Now, it is in the case of the third generation—and
not in that of father and grandfather only—that ownership would be
established by possession only:—but in his case also it is not
possession during twenty years only. Others again hold that mere
possession—even though extending over a hundred years—cannot be regarded
as a ground for ownership; and in support of this they quote the
following texts:—(*a*) ‘If a person enjoys a property without
title,—even for hundreds of years, he should be punished with the
penalty of a thief’ (Nārada, 87); (*b*) ‘If one man puts forward only
possession, and no title, he should be regarded as a thief’ (Nārada,
86); (*c*) “The law is that it is authority, and not possession, that
forms the ground of ownership’ (Nārada, 84). What has been referred to
above in regard to possession extending over ‘hundreds of years’ (not
being a right ground), is long-extending possession by one and the same
person; and such possession cannot establish one’s ownership, unless
there has been possession by his father and grandfather also.

“But how can one person possess a property for *hundreds of years*?”

There is no force in this objection. Such expressions as ‘hundred
years,’ ‘thousand years’ and the like are used only in the sense of
*long periods of time*; *e.g*., in such statements—‘The man lives for a
hundred years, of hundred glories and hundred organs.’

The upshot of all this is that in the case of the first generation of
the possessor, mere possession, even though extending over a period of
twenty years or more, does not establish *ownership*,—which means that
the son of such a possessor also does not acquire the ownership; and
thus the meaning of the texts is just as is directly signified by their
words.

As a matter of fact, it is not possible for the ‘Title’ of possession to
be remembered for ‘several hundred years’: so that if the production of
such title were insisted upon, kings would come to confiscate all those
properties that may have belonged of yore to temples, Brāhmaṇas,
monasteries and village-communities. As for written land-grants, these
also could not have their writings verified and recognised, after the
lapse of a long time, as actually written by the king’s scribes; and the
grants themselves might be suspected to be forged. Hence long-standing
possession is regarded as indicative of the presence of valid title in
the shape of a gift-deed and the like, and it is for this reason that
possession has been mentioned among ‘proofs’ in the text—‘There are
three grounds of ownership—documentary evidence, witnesses and
possession’ (Nārada, 69),—and not as a ‘ground of ownership,’ which are
mentioned in the text—‘There are seven marks of acquiring property’
(Manu, 10.115), and also in the text—‘Learning, Bravery, Austerity,
Daughter, etc., etc.’

Or the assertion of Nārada—‘If a man enjoys a property without
authority, etc.’—may be taken as referring to a case where there is
suspicion of forcible possession; as in the same context we find the
text—’ (1) Misrepresented Deposits, (2) Stolen goods, (3) Deposits, (4)
Goods retained forcibly, (5) What is obtained by begging, and (6) What
is possessed secretly,—these six are property possessed without title’
(Nārada, 92).

“But this has been already declared in another text:—

‘Deposits, Boundaries, etc.’ (Manu, 8.159, and Nārada, 8).” What these
latter texts refer to is possession during three generations only, and
the text under consideration precludes the propriety of possession
beyond that also; as is clearly indicated by the phrase ‘for several
hundred years.’

In the text under consideration, ‘*anvāhitam*,’ ‘Misrepresented
Deposits,’ stands for an article which is actutally pledged in a form
different from that in which it was shown at the time of the
transaction;—‘stolen goods’ for what is obtained by fraud or by breaking
through a wall at night, and so forth; while ‘forcible retention’
implies the use of force; this is the difference between the two;—the
rest is quite clear.

“If it is only *possession for three generations* that is a ground for
title, what then is the meaning of the text—‘One loses his ownership
over land, if he sees it being enjoyed by another, without saying
anything’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*, 24).”

Some people offer the following explanation:—The text refers to the case
where the man has been in possession of a property for some time, and a
documentary flaw, or some such vitiating element, happens to be
detected,—*e.g*., it is found that it was executed under pressure, or
some letters are found to have been rubbed out, and so forth;—as ‘twenty
years’ is ample time for the ascertaining of the exact nature of the
suspicious document.

Others however explain it as referring to the case where the man offers
the same plot of land as pledge to one person, after having previously
pledged it to another,—and the title of the one is prior to that of the
other; and what is meant is that in such a case, notwithstanding the
priority of the title, greater validity attaches to the ‘possession’ by
the other person, if it has continued for twenty years.

This however is not right; for it has been declared that, when a person
hits accepted a pledge, it means that it has been accepted as ‘deposit’;
and in the case of land, this acceptance implies a desire for
possession; so that in a case like this, the character of the ‘pledge’
becomes established by possession during a short time also. It is with
reference to such cases that we have the declaration—‘What a man is not
possessed of, that is not his own; even though there be documentary
proof and witnesses Ire living; specially in the case of immovables’
(Nārada, 77). The term ‘*specially*’ implies that in the case of cows,
horses, etc., there *is* ownership even without ‘possession’ or ‘use’;
as these latter are not always *used*; and one does not always know what
benefits he may derive from such pledges as these latter. In the case of
land on the other hand, it yields its produce at all times; and hence in
the absence of actual ‘use’ or ‘possession,’ the fact of its having been
‘pledged’ cannot be established.

If the pledger ignores the fact of his having pledged the land to one
person, and offers it to another, even during the period of its
possession by the first pledgee,—and the second pledgee also has
accepted it,—while the former pledgee, either through the distraction of
other business or on account of the distance of the place, has failed to
‘accept’ and take possession of it,—in such a case the circumstances do
not deprive the first pledgee of his right over the land. When, however,
immediately after having received the deposit, the man Is banished by
the king, or is attacked by serious illness, and there is no authorised
person to look after his property,—if the man returns after a long time,
if he can prove his clear title to it, he does obtain possession of the
land, even though in the meantime it may have been pledged to another
person.

Others explain the text as referring to the subject of the revision and
equalising of the shares of brothers, who have separated and divided
their property in unequal shares (twenty years ago); the meaning being
that there can be no such revision after twenty years.

But if this were all that is meant, this should have occurred under the
context dealing with that subject. In fact, a general statement, made
apart from a particular context, indicates that it pertains to other
subjects also.

Others again take it as referring to the case of ‘possession’ where an
uncultivated plot of land has been cultivated by a man; and they declare
that in this case if the possession has continued for twenty years, and
its exact extent has not been checked by means of chains and surveying
instruments,—then all this checking cannot he done after the lapse of
that time.

The revered teachers however explain as follows:—When two men,
inhabitants of the same place, possessing similar powers, similar
natures, equal wealth,—not related to one another,—happen to have the
same interest in a certain immovable property,—if one of them permits
the other to enjoy it during the said time (twenty years), the former
retains no right over the property.

This however would be incompatible with the rule laying down the period
as ‘three generations.’

Thus then, in as much as the various rules bearing upon the subject are
found to be incompatible with one another,—which incompatibility cannot
be set aside by any assumptions,—what has got to be ascertained in each
case is if there is any clear title to ownership,—and in the event of
there being none, if the property is in the possession of another party;
if it is, then the decision must proceed on the basis of such possession
only.

Though there are several kinds of titles to ownership,—such as gift,
sale, pledge and so forth,—yet in the event of none of these titles
being present, if it is shown that there has been possession extending
over twenty years, without break, the right course is to regard it as a
case of ‘pledge.’ Such ownership based upon possession is ephemeral, and
can be set aside if there is deterioration in the property concerned.
(?) Thus it is that possession during three generations creates the
rights of ownership in all cases; possibility of gift or sale, etc.,
also there could be only for one year. So that in the case of possession
for twenty years, there is no incongruity at all.

In a case however where both persons are absolutely without title, and
are asserting themselves by mere force,—the prior possession, even
though of longer standing, is set aside by the twenty years’ possession,
which is more recent and hence free from all suspicion. That is to say,
possession during three generations is set aside in favour of
possession, the exact period of whose duration is precisely
ascertainable.

‘*Becomes frustrated in law*’;—the phrase ‘*in law*’ is added in order
to preclude the notion of its being ‘morally right.’ For if some flaw in
the possession were detected, the possession could be defeated; so that
if the possessor bases his case entirely upon the circumstance that
there is no evidence forthcoming to show that his possession is
fraudulent,—his victory cannot be regarded as morally right; so the fact
remains that the other party loses his case simply on account of the
said possession.—(148)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 632), which adds that, if the
user of the property knows that it rightfully belongs to another, then,
even though he may have acquired ownership by legal usage
(*vyavahārēṇa*), yet he should hand it over to the rightful owner;—in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 334);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 15b);—and
in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 66a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.147-148)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.147].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अजडश् चेद् अपो[गण्ड इति ए]तौ स्वधनान्वेषणाय पर्याप्तौ, न तु जडः, पोगण्डो वा, शक्तिविकल्पत्वात् । विषये चान्यस्य भुज्यते चक्षुषः नाप्रकाशम् । अथ वा स्वविषये नान्य[विषये], न प्रोषीतस्य । एवं च सति पश्यतः समर्थस्य [स]तो भुज्यमानं स्वद्रव्यम् उपक्षया युक्तस् तदपहारो दशवर्षभोगेन । अजडापोगण्डग्रहणेन चान्यद् अपि {स्वध]नान्वेषणव्यासङ्गकारणम् अपाटवादि गृह्यते । सत्रदीक्षादिव्यासङ्गकारणम् अभिहितं विज्ञेयम् । दशवर्षभोगेन स्वीकरणापवादार्थम् इदम् आरभ्यते ॥ ८.१४७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

148	If (the owner is) neither an idiot nor a minor and if (his chattel) is enjoyed (by another) before his eyes, it is lost to him by law; the adverse possessor shall retain that property.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/149_AdhiH_sImA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>149 आधिः सीमा ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

आधिः सीमा बालधनं  
निक्षेपोपनिधिः स्त्रियः [मेधातिथिपाठः - निक्षेपोपनिधी] ।  
राजस्वं श्रोत्रियस्वं च  
न भोगेन प्रणश्यति  ॥ ८.१४९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/149_AdhiH_sImA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A pledge, a boundary, minor’s property, a deposit, a property enjoyed by favour, women, king’s property, and the property of a vedic scholar are not lost by adverse possession.—(149)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

आधीयत इत्य् **आधिर्** बन्धकद्रव्यं गोभूहिरण्याद्य् उच्यते । यच् चोत्तमर्णाद् धनम् आदीयते । **उपनिधिः** शास्त्रान्तरेणान्तर्हितो[^२७९] न्यास उक्तः, यद् अप्रदर्शितरूपं सचिह्नवस्त्रादिना पिहितं निक्षिप्यते । प्रीतिभोग्यं तु युक्तम् उपनिधिशब्दवाच्यम्, तस्य निक्षेपग्रहणेनैव गृहीतत्वात् । **सीमा** मर्यादा ग्रामादीनाम् । बहुसाधारण्याद् धि तत्रोपेक्षा संभवति । गृहादीनां तु प्राकारपरिखादिरूपा द्वित्रिहस्तपरिमाणरूपा द्वयोः साधारणी यान्यतरेण[^२८०] कथंचिद् उपजीव्यमाना[^२८१] । स्वल्पत्वाद् भोगश् च[^२८२] कश्चित् कियन्तं कालम् उपेक्षेतापि[^२८३] । तत्रापि[^२८४] दानादिसत्त्वापगमहेतुं संभावयतः[^२८५] । अतस् तत्पुत्राः पौत्रा वा गूढचिह्नादिना प्रज्ञापितसीमत्वाद् आच्छिन्दयत्य् एव । **बालधनं** दृष्टान्तार्थम्, पोगण्डशब्दस्य दर्शितत्वाद् (म्ध् ८.१४८) इत्य् उक्तम् । **स्त्रियो** दास्यः, भार्या वा । नेतरस्याधनस्यापहार उक्तः "धनस्य दशवार्षिकी" (य्ध् २.२४) इति ।


[^२८५]:
     DK (1: 1: 388): saṃbhāvayati (DK 5: 1190 follows edition)


[^२८४]:
     DK (1: 388) add: na; (DK 5: 1190 follows edition)


[^२८३]:
     M G: upekṣya; J: upekṣyetāpi


[^२८२]:
     G M DK (1: 388): bhogasya


[^२८१]:
     M G: upajīyamānā; J: upajīryamāṇā


[^२८०]:
     M G J: yānyatare


[^२७९]:
     DK (1: 388): vastrā-

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च नेह धनम् अस्ति । "यत्किंचित्" (म्ध् ८.१४७) इति वस्तुमात्रनिर्देशो ऽयम् । 

<u>नैवम्</u> । "धनी" (म्ध् ८.४७) इति संबन्धेन धनविषयतैव "यत्किंचित्" इति सामान्यशब्दस्य प्रतीयते । क एवम् आह स्त्रियो न धनम् इति । इत्थं विनियोज्ये[^२८६] द्रव्ये धनशब्दो वर्तते । अथास्माद् एव स्त्रीधनात् स्वत्वमात्रोपलक्षणम् । धनोपमानेन पुमांसो ऽपि भोगेन दासाः स्वीक्रियन्त एव ।  
**राजस्वं** । देशेश्वरा राजानः, तेषां धनम् । ते हि महाधनत्वाद् उच्चत्वान्वयं[^२८७] धनम् अन्विच्छन्तो ऽधिकृतैर् विरुतभेदादिभिर्[^२८८] निधनीक्रियन्ते तदूनापेक्षया[^२८९] । **श्रोत्रिय**द्रव्यं श्रोत्रियधनाभियुक्तिः ॥ ८.१४९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Ādhi*’ is that which is *pledged*; an article given as pledge,—such as
cattle, land, gold and so forth,—to the creditor; and recovered from him
(upon re-payment of the debt).

‘*Upanidhi*’ has been explained,—in accordance with another treatise
(Yājñavalkya, 2.65) as a deposit, whose form is not shown and which is
handed over, covered with cloth and sealed. But this being already
included under ‘*deposit*,’ it is better to take the term ‘*upanidhi*’
as standing for what is given for use, through friendliness and favour.

‘*Boundary*’—the boundary-line between villages, etc. It is quite
possible that it being a public concern, men are likely to ignore
encroachments upon it. In the case of houses, the boundary-line, marked
by ditches or walls, two, three or four cubits in size, is common to
both; and if either side of it happens to crumble down in time, as the
matter would be a slight one, even encroachment might be ignored for
some time by a certain person. But since in such matters also the owner
fearing the loss of ownership through gift, etc., his sons or grandsons
do discover some hidden marks of the original boundary and assert their
claims to the recovery of the boundary encroached upon.

‘*Minor’s property*’;—this has been added only by way of illustration;
the *minor* having been already referred to by the name ‘*pogaṇḍa*’ (in
Verse 148).

‘*Women*,’—slave-girls or wife; as no other woman, save these two, have
anywhere been described as ‘property,’ ownership over which could be
lost through possession extending over ten years, as spoken of in Verse
147.

*Objection*.—“But the text (147) does not speak of ‘*property*’ at all;
the expression used is ‘*whatever thing*,’ which refers to *things in
general*.”

No; the use of the term ‘*dhani*,’ ‘*owner*,’ clearly indicates that the
expression ‘whatever thing’ refers *to property*, which, in this case,
is used in the sense of *anything that is used*; and this mention of
women as ‘property’ indicates all kinds of possessions. From this
analogy of ‘property,’ males also, as slaves, are actually regarded as
‘property.’

‘*The king’s propety*;’—the ‘*kings*’ meant here are the rulers of
provinces; the property belonging to such rulers. These people have vast
properties, which they cannot always watch over carefully; so that if
their property were liable to be lost through adverse possession, they
would soon be reduced to penury.

‘*The properly of Vedic Scholars*’—though poor in comparison,—has yet
got to be preserved with care.—(149)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Śāstrāntareṇa*’—(Medhātithi, p. 965, l. 1)—This refers to Yājñavalkya,
2.65. ‘*Vāsanasthamanākhyāya haste nyasya yadarpayet*’; and
Nārada—‘*asaṅkhyātamavijñātam samudram yannidhīyate*.’

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 109), which
adds that the term ‘*śrotriya*’ includes also all such persons who have
their attention too much taken up by other things to allow their looking
after their belongings in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 158), which
notes the following reasons for neglect—(*a*) In regard to boundaries,
people are apt to be lulled into security by the ease with which the
boundary-line can be determined,—(*b*) in regard to women, their natural
shyness lulls men into security,—(*c*) in the case of the king and the
scholar, their minds are too much taken up with their temporal and
spiritual concerns respectively;—and in *Vīramitrodaya*, (Vyavahāra,
69b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Śukranīti* (4.5.445).—‘The following property cannot be destroyed by
length of adverse, possession:—pledge, boundary-land, minor’s property,
trust property, sealed deposit, female slaves, government property and
the property of Vedic Scholars.’

*Nārada* (1.81).—‘A pledge, a boundary, property of a child, an open
deposit, a sealed deposit, women, what belongs to the King, or to the
Vedic Scholar—none of these is lost by adverse possession.’

*Bṛhaspati* (9.13, 14).—‘Forcible means should not be resorted to by the
present occupant, or his son, in maintaining possession of the property
of an infant, or of a learned Brāhmaṇa, or the property inherited from
one’s father;—nor of cattle, a woman, a slave, or other property.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.18).—‘They quote the following:—“A pledge, a boundary,
the property of minors, an open deposit, a sealed deposit, women, king’s
property and property of the Vedic Scholar are not lost by being enjoyed
by others.”

*Gautama* (12.39).—‘Animals, land, and females are not lost by adverse
possession.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.25).—‘A pledge, a boundary, deposit—^(:) open and
sealed, the property of infants, idiots, and of the King, and of women,
and of the Vedic scholars;—with the exception of these, all property
becomes lost to the owner by adverse possession extending over twenty
years.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

स्त्रियः परिचारिकाः नोढाह् शास्त्रविरोधात् । अन्ये त्व् आहुः- ऊढा अपि प्रत्याहरणीयाः प्रायश्चित्तेन । यतो न युक्तम् आसाम् आपद्य् अपहृतानां परित्यागः । राजस्वश्रोत्रियस्वयोश् च लब्धक्रीतयोर् अपि भोगेनाप्रणाशः । तत्र श्रोत्रियधर्मस्याचारासङ्गात् । राज्ञश् च स्वतन्त्रानुष्ठानसङ्गेन । अन्यदीययोस् तु लब्धक्रीतयोर् अन्य एव स्यात् ॥ ८.१४८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

149	A pledge, a boundary, the property of infants, an (open) deposit, a sealed deposit, women, the property of the king and the wealth of a Srotriya are not lost in consequence of (adverse) enjoyment.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/150_yaH_svAminAnanujnAtam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>150 यः स्वामिनाननुज्ञातम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यः स्वामिनाननुज्ञातम्  
आधिं भूङ्क्ते ऽविचक्षणः ।  
तेनाऽर्धवृद्धिर् मोक्तव्या  
तस्य भोगस्य निष्कृतिः  ॥ ८.१५० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/150_yaH_svAminAnanujnAtam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The fool, who, without the owner’s permission, uses a deposit, shall have to remit half the amount of the interest, as compensation for such use.—(150)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तम् "न भोक्तव्यो बलाद् आधिर्[^२९०] भुञ्जानो वृद्धिम् उत्सृजेत्" (म्ध् ८.१४४) इति । सर्वस्य हि ग्रहणम् उच्यते । तत्र निषिद्धे[^२९१] भोगे बलाद् आधिं भुञ्जनः "वृद्धिम् उत्सृजेत्" इति,[^२९२] सर्वां[^२९३] हारयत्य् एव वृद्धिम् । अननुज्ञाते प्रतिषेधनम्[^२९४] । रहस्य् उपभुज्यमानभोगे न चाधिर् नश्यति, तत्र[^२९५] रूप्यसुवर्णालंकारादाव्[^२९६] अर्धवृद्धित्यागो ऽनेन श्लोकेनोच्यते । 


[^२९६]:
     M G DK: rūpa-


[^२९५]:
     M G omit: tatra; DK (1:640) omits: na cādhir naśyati, tatra


[^२९४]:
     M G DK 1: 640: anabhihipratiṣedhanaṃ (DK: -pratiṣedhane)


[^२९३]:
     M G: sarvaṃ


[^२९२]:
     J DK (5: 1191) omit: "vṛddhim utsṛjet" iti


[^२९१]:
     M G: niṣiddho


[^२९०]:
     M G: bhoktavyaṃ balād ādhiṃ

- यत् तु नवं महार्घम् अलंकरणवस्त्रादि परिधीयमानं नासितं तत्र न केवलं वृद्धिहानिः, यावद् धनं[^२९७] नष्टं तत् परिपीड्य मूलतः प्रविशतीति महत्तरैर् व्याख्यातम् । यज्वना तु व्याख्यातम्-[^२९८] यत्र स्वामी व्यवहरति अध्यधीनश् च, तत्राध्यधीनेन[^२९९] बन्धो दत्तः, स्वामिना च दृष्टः, तत्र धारणकेन कस्मिंश्चिद् अवसरे ऽध्यधीनः पृष्टः- "प्रयोजनं ममानेन बन्धेनास्ति", तत्रोपनिधिन्यायेन[^३००] तेनानुज्ञातः कालान्तरे भुञ्जानं यदि स्वामी पश्यंस् तदनुज्ञातं बन्धं क्षपितवान् — सतीदृशे विषये ऽर्धवृद्धित्यागः । 


[^३००]:
     M G: tatropanidhir nyāyena


[^२९९]:
     M G: tatrāpy adhīnena


[^२९८]:
     M G: vyākhyānam; the reference is to Bhār.


[^२९७]:
     M G add: na

<u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । यतस् तुल्यो व्यवहारः परस्परापेक्षः स्वामिभृत्ययोः । तत्र[^३०१] तत्रान्यतरेणानुज्ञातेनायम् अनुज्ञातः[^३०२] प्रयुज्यते ऽधर्मतः[^३०३] । स्वामिशब्दस्यार्थे स्वत्वम् ईदृशि विषये भवति । अन्यथा बन्धं यो ददाति सो ऽवश्यं स्वाम्येन युक्तः[^३०४] । अध्यधीनस् तु न स्वामी । यद्य् एवं चौरस् तर्हि । तस्मात् स्वामित्वाध्यारोपः । उपयोगे वाध्यधीने स्वाम्यनुज्ञाव्यवहाराद् ब्रह्मदत्तवत् । अतः पूर्व एवार्थः ।   
**स्वामि**ग्रहणं पादपूरणार्थम् । **भुङ्क्ते ऽविचक्षण** इत्य् अकारः संहितया प्रश्लिष्टनिर्दिष्टो वेदितव्यः । यस्य ह्य् अस्ति बुद्धिः "वृद्धिर् ममास्त्य् एव, अधिको लाभो वस्तुभोगः" इति, सो ऽ**विचक्षणः** । न हि लोकशास्त्रवियोजनीया[^३०५] स्थितिः, यद् उभौ लाभाश् च भोगश् च वृद्धिः स्यात् । तेन सा वृद्धिर् भोक्तव्या । **निष्कृतिः** परशुद्धिः, विनियम इति यावत् । 



[^३०५]:
     M G: loke

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु द्विगुणीभूते ऽप्य् अमोक्ष्यमाणे प्रतिषेधम् इमम् इच्छन्ति, तस्य हि स्वल्पो ऽपराध इति वदन्तः । 

<u>प्रथमं</u> तावद् आदाव् एव तैर् याज्ञवल्क्यवचनस्य विषयो देयः- "आधिः प्रणश्येत्" (य्ध् २.६०) इति ॥ ८.१५० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been declared (under 144)—‘a deposit should not be used by
force,—by using it one renounces the interest:’ and what was meant there
was the absolute appropriation of the entire deposit; and when such
using has been forbidden, it is only right that by using a deposit by
force, the man should lose the entire amount of his interest. By merely
using the article however, the deposit does not become destroyed, it
only becomes deteriorated, in colour, brightness and decorations; and
the present verse lays down that in such cases the man shall lose half
the amount of his interest.

In a case however, where the deposit consists of new and valuable
ornaments or clothes, and on being worn they become spoilt,—there is to
be not merely loss of interest, but the man is to be made to pay the
price of the property spoilt; this is as the matter has been explained
by great scholars.

Ṛju (Yajvan) (?) however has explained as follows:—In a case where
business is carried on by the master as well as by the servant, and a
pledge has been deposited by the servant, and seen by the master
also,—if after some time, the pledger says to the servant—‘I have need
for the article pledged,’—and is permitted by him to use it; whereupon,
if the master, on seeing him using it, cancels the pledge and takes it
back;—in such a case half the amount of interest has to be renounced.

This however is not right; as, under the circumstances, transactions
carried on by the master or the servant stand upon the same footing. So
that when the using has been permitted by one, it cannot be held to be
not permitted by the other and hence illegal. In such a case, it is
actual ‘ownership’ that forms the denotation of the term ‘owner.’
Otherwise, the person who deposits the article would certainly appear to
be the ‘owner’; but the servant is not the ‘owner’; so that if he does
give away the thing, he would be only a thief. For this reason
‘*ownership*’ has to be attributed to him. Hence when the using has been
permitted by the servant, it is treated as permitted by the master also.

For these reasons, the meaning of the verse must ho as previously
explained and the mention of the ‘owner’ is only for the purpose of
filling up the metre.

Between the two terms in the expression—‘*Bhuṅktevicakṣaṇaḥ*,’ an ‘a’ is
to be understood as present in a merged form due to the proximity of the
two vowels (*e* and *a*). That man who entertains the idea—‘my interest
is already safe, so that the use of the article is an additional
gain’—is called here a ‘*fool*’ For no such transaction is sanctioned by
law as would involve both the securing of interest and the using of the
pledged article; hence it is only the interest that should be earned.

‘*Compensation*’—Expiatory price; exchange.

Others have explained the prohibition contained in the present verse as
referring to the case where the pledge is not redeemed, even after the
principal has been doubled; and they hold that the fault, in this case
is comparatively insignificant (hence only half the interest is lost).

But first of all, these persons should be required to point out the
subject of Yājñavalkya’s assertion (Vyavahāra-58) regarding the ‘pledge
becoming lost if it is not redeemed on the principal having been
doubled.’—(150)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 23) \[for whose
explanatory note, see note on verse 144\];—in *Aparārka* (p. 659), which
adds that what is here laid down applies to cases where very little use
has been made of the thing; in cases where the pledged thing has been
very much used, no interest is to be paid; thus the reduction in the
interest has to be determined by the extent of the use to which the
thing may have been put;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru*, (70a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (1.128).—‘That foolish person who uses a pledge without the
authority of the owner, shall lose one half of his interest, as a
compensation for such use.’

[\[See Texts under
143-144.\]]
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

स्वामी च गृहे व्यवहरति । तत्प्रयुक्तश् च भृत्यः । तथा च वक्ष्यति "कुटुम्बार्थ ऽध्यधीनः" [इति] । तेनाननुज्ञातश् च स्वामिना य आधिं भुङ्क्ते ऽविचक्षणः तेनार्धवृद्धिर् अर्था उपक्ष्यन्त इत्य् एवं न जानाति । एतस्मात् कारणाद् अनेन तस्यार्धवृद्धिर् मोक्तव्या भोगनिष्कृत्यर्थम् । एवं च ग्रहणाधमनयोः प्रमाणम् अध्यधीनः पृथक्तन्तुत्वत् (?) तु नोपभोगानुज्ञाने दाने । एतच् च यो वेद स विचक्षणः । तथा चायम् एव युक्तः पाठः- न विचक्षणः स्वाम्युपसर्जनत्वाद् अध्यधीनस्येति । अन्यस् त्व् आह पूर्वो द्विगुणीभूते विधिर् उक्तः, "न भोक्तव्यो बलाद् आधिर् भुञ्जानो वृद्धिम् उत्सृजेत्" इत्य् एषः । अयं पुनर् आदाव् एवोच्यते ॥ ८.१४९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

150	The fool who uses a pledge without the permission of the owner, shall remit half of his interest, as a compensation for (such) use.
</details>
</details>
</div>

  
## 151-200
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/151_kusIdavRddhir_dvaiguNyam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>151 कुसीदवृद्धिर् द्वैगुण्यम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

कुसीदवृद्धिर् द्वैगुण्यं  
नाऽत्येति सकृद् आहृता [मेधातिथिपाठः - सकृद् आहिता] ।  
धान्ये सदे लवे वाह्ये  
नाऽतिक्रामति पञ्चताम्  ॥ ८.१५१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/151_kusIdavRddhir_dvaiguNyam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Interest on money-loans stipulated at one time shall not exceed the double; in the case of grains, fruits, wool and beasts of burden, it shall not go beyond the quintuple.—(151)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

लाभार्थो धनप्रयोगः **कुसीदम्**, तत्र **वृद्धिः** । अथ वा प्रयुज्यमानं प्रयोक्तृसंबन्धिधनम् एव **कुसीदम्** । "मदीयं[^३०७] स्वल्पं दत्त्वाधिकं ग्रहीष्यामि" इति धनं दीयते, तत् **कुसीदम्** । तत्र **वृद्धिः** । सा द्विगुणत्वं नातिक्रामति । तावद् उत्तमर्णेन वृद्ध्यर्थं धनं दत्तवताधर्मर्णाद् ग्रहीतव्यं यावन् मूलधनं द्विगुणं प्रविष्टम् ।


[^३०७]:
     M G: yadāyaṃ; DK (1: 612): yadāhaṃ; J: yadīyaṃ (I follow the reading of DK 5: 1192)

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु वृद्धेर् द्वैगुण्यं श्रूयते । मूलेन सह त्रिगुणं प्राप्नोति । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;नैवम् । गुणो ऽवयव उच्यते । स तावद् अवयविनम् अपेक्षते । प्रकृतं च धनम् । अतः प्रयोगविषयस्य धनस्यानेन प्रकारेण द्वैगुण्यम् उक्तं भवति । तथा च स्मृत्यन्तरम्- "चिरस्थाने द्वैगुण्यं प्रयोगस्य" (ग्ध् १२.३१), "मोच्य आधिस् तदुत्पन्ने प्रविष्टे द्विगुणे धने" (य्ध् २.६६) इति ।

- वृद्धिश् चानेकरूपा । कार्षापणेषु प्रयुक्तेषु कार्षापण एव वर्धते । क्वचित् संततिः । "स्त्रीपशूनाम् वा" (न्स्म् १.९२) इति संततिः । क्वचिद् आधिभोगः गोभूम्यादेः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;तत्रेदं द्वैगुण्यं सरूपवृद्धिविषयं केचिद् आहुः । तत्र हि मुख्यं वृद्धेर् द्वैगुण्यं प्रतीयते । संततौ न विज्ञायते- किं संख्यायास्या[^३०८] द्वैगुण्यम् उत परिमाणेनोत मानतो[^३०९] वेयम् । अतो वेत्याद्यनिश्चयः[^३१०] । पशूनाम् मूल्याद् धि महार्घत्वं हस्त्यश्वादिषु क्रयविक्रयादौ दृश्यत एव । महाप्रमाणा हि महार्घा भवन्ति ।


[^३१०]:
     M G DK (1: 612; 5: 1192): vetyādiniścaye


[^३०९]:
     M G DK (1: 612; 5: 1192): parimāṇenonmānatā


[^३०८]:
     M G: -āsya

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च संततौ सारूप्यम् अस्त्य् एव । गोः संततिर् गौर् एव । तत्र भेदोपन्यासो न युक्तो वृद्धिः सरूपा संततिश् चेति ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;उच्यते । नैकजातीयत्वमात्रेण सारूप्यं भवति, किं तु वयःपरिमाणादिसाम्येन । अतो युक्तो भेदोपन्यासः । भोगलाभे ऽपि कुतो द्वैगुण्यप्रतीतिः । उपकारकाणि[^३११] जनयतुं गावः प्रयुज्यन्ते । गोभूम्यादि पयोयवसादयो यथासंभवं भुज्यन्ते । तत्र कीदृशं द्वैगुण्यम् । समाचारश् च क्वचिद् दृश्यते । वर्षशतानि भूमिर् आ मूलहिरण्यादानाद् भुज्यते । पठति च याज्ञवल्क्यः- "आधिश् च भुज्यते तावद् यावत् तन् न प्रदीयते" (य्ध् २.९३) इति । 


[^३११]:
     MG: -pratītirūpakāṇi; DK: -pratītiḥ | rūpakāṇi

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अत्रोच्यते । वृद्धिमात्रे श्रूयमाणे द्वैगुण्यं कथं विसेषे ऽवस्थाप्यते । न हि श्रुत्या[^३१२] सामान्यप्रतिपत्तिर् भवन्ती विना प्रमाणेन विशेषे ऽवस्थातुम् अर्हति । यत् तु संतताव् अनुपपन्नं द्वैगुण्यम् इति, अवगमे यत्नः क्रियताम् । मूलमर्षेण परिनिश्चितवता वृद्धिस् तत्सामान्या यत[^३१३] एव तज्जातानां भवति । भूमिभोगे ऽपि यवसगोधूमादौ तत्पच्यमानस्यार्घतः[^३१४] शक्यत एव समत्वं निश्चेतुम् । उपकारवचनो ऽपि गुणशब्दो ऽस्ति । क एवं सति समगुणो भवति क उपकारको भवतीति कथं[^३१५] गम्यते । अनेन यावन् मूल्यं गोधान्यविनिमयाद् उत्पद्यते तावद् एव चेत् तत उत्पन्ना वृद्धिस् तदा भवति समगुणत्वम्, परिमाणादिसाम्याभावे ऽपि । यस् तु क्वचित् समाचारः- भवतैव परिहृतः क्वचिद् ग्रहणं प्रयुञ्जानेन[^३१६] । समाचारभ्रंशसंभवे स्मृतयो नियामिका अर्थवत्यः । 


[^३१६]:
     M G DK: prayuñjāne


[^३१५]:
     M G DK omit: kathaṃ


[^३१४]:
     M G DK: -ārthataḥ


[^३१३]:
     J omits: yata


[^३१२]:
     M G: stutyā

"अक्षीणि मे दर्शनीयानि पादा मे सुकुमारतराः" इत्य्वत् प्रयोगाद् बहुषु[^३१७] बहुवचनम् इति शास्त्रम् आरभ्यते । असति विप्रयोगदर्शने प्रत्याख्यायते । उपसर्जनोपसर्गपौर्वापर्यप्रयोगसिद्ध्यर्थम् उक्तम् । न हि कश्चित् प्रपचतीति प्रयोक्तव्ये पचति प्रेते प्रयुङ्क्त इति । वचनम् अपि[^३१८] "आधिस् तु भुज्यते तावद् यावत् तन् न प्रदीयते"[^३१९] यावद् दानात् तद्द्विगुणम् अप्रविष्टम्, इत्य् अपि शक्यते नेतुम् । स्मृत्यन्तरैवाक्यत्वाच् चैतद् एव युक्तम् अध्यवसातुम् । उपपादितं चैतन् निपुणतो ऽन्यत्र ।  

**सकृद् आहिता** । **सकृद्** इत्य् अनेन व्यवस्थापितो ऽङ्गीकृतः पुनः पुनः प्रोयोग इति यावत् । आधानं स्थापनं उच्यते । वचनव्यवस्थया च निरूपणं स्थापनम् एव । पुनः प्रयोगश् च[^३२०] द्विगुणीभूते धने आदीयमाने भवति । यदा द्विगुणवृद्ध्यर्थम्[^३२१] उत्तमर्णः, अधमर्णश् च तदीयेन धनेन महत्कार्यं करिष्यन् करणपरिवृत्तिं करोतीति या प्राक्तनी वृद्धिर् इयं वाद्यप्रभृति वर्धत इति, तदा द्विगुणभूतम् अपि पुनर् वर्धत एव । पुरुषान्तरसंचारेण वा यदि द्विगुणीभूतं धनिकस्योपयुज्यते, तदाधमर्ण उच्यमानो ऽन्यपुरुषं ददतम् अर्पयति "एष त इयद्भिर् अहोभिर् दास्यति" इति तत्र स्वहस्तं दीयमानं पुनर् वर्द्धते । न चायं दानं प्रति प्रतिप्रतिभूः किं तु निक्षेप्ता दातैव । एतत् तु ऋजुना "पुरुषान्तरम् असंक्रान्तम्" (भार् ओन् म्ध् ८.१५०; प्। ११३) इति व्याख्यातम् । 



[^३२१]:
     M G J: dviguṇo hi vṛddhyartha


[^३२०]:
     M G: prayogasya

- अथ वा प्राग् अपि द्वैगुण्याद् यदा बन्धम् अन्यस्मै प्रत्यर्पयति, दीनारेषु सलाभेषु द्वित्वे, तस्य बन्धस्य मोक्ष एव धर्म्यः[^३२२] । बन्धस्य प्राग्वृद्धौ स्थितायां तस्माद् अह्नः प्रभृति पुनर् द्वैगुण्यम् आप्नोति । यदा तदीयं बन्धकं तदनुज्ञयोत्तमर्णेनान्यत्राधाय स्वधनं गृह्यते तदा वर्धते । एष पुरुषान्तरसंचारः । 


[^३२२]:
     M G DK: tasyābandhasya eṣa tu dharmākṣako

- उभयत्र[^३२३] द्विगुणीभूते प्रयोक्ताधमर्णिकेन येन केन[^३२४] प्रकारेणान्यस्माद् ग्रहणम् अनुज्ञाप्यते । यदि वास्माद् अन्यद् गृह्यते, ग्रहीता देशान्तरं गमिष्यन् कार्यान्तरेण चान्यत्र संचारयति । ऋजुस् (=भार्) तु तस्माद् एवाधर्मर्णाद् अनवीकृते प्रयोगे द्विगुणाधिकां वृद्धिं नेच्छति । अत आह पुरुषान्तरम् असंक्रान्ते पुनःक्रिया । प्रयोजनं च वक्ष्यामः । 


[^३२४]:
     M G DK omit: yena kena


[^३२३]:
     M G: ubhayatvād

- ये तु व्याचक्षते- "या वृद्धिर् उपचिता सांवत्सरी युगपत् सर्वैवानीयते[^३२५] तत्रायं विधिः । या पुनः प्राप्तदानापि सर्वा न दीयते तत्र द्विगुनाद् अधिकग्रहणम् अपि," तेषां न **न**शब्दो यथार्थो नाप्य् **आहित** इति । सांवत्सरी तावद् उपचिता ग्राह्या द्वितीयसंवत्सरे पुनर् आनयनम् अस्त्य् एवेति न क्वचिद् द्वैगुण्यनियमः स्यात् । 


[^३२५]:
     M G: sarve vā nīyante; DK: sarvā vā dīyate

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अथ यो द्विगुणीभूतं सलाभं धनम् आनयति तत्राधिकनिषेधो ऽस्तु । प्राग् द्वैगुण्याद्[^३२६] वृद्धिमात्रदानसमर्थो[^३२७] वृद्धिं ददाति । मूलं तस्यापरिमितग्रहणम् इति । 


[^३२७]:
     M G: -dāyasamartho


[^३२६]:
     M G: dvaiguṇyā-

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;एतद् अपि न किंचित् । यः संवहति तस्यानुग्रहो न्याय्यो नाधिकग्रहणम् । यस् तु राज्ञा[^३२८] द्विगुणीभूतम् अपि कथंचिद् आप्यते तस्याधिकमोक्ष इत्य् एतद् अन्याय्यम् । न च्**आहिते**त्यस्य[^३२९] शब्दस्यायम् अर्थः । 


[^३२९]:
     M G: cāhitenyasya


[^३२८]:
     M G DK: rājā

अथ "आहृता" इति[^३३०] पाठान्तरम् । तथापि **सकृच्**छब्दो न निश्चितार्थो न्यायस्[^३३१] तु परित्यक्तः स्वकृतश् च पाठः स्यान् न मानवी स्मृतिर् इत्य् उक्तैव व्यवस्था न्याय्या ।  

**धान्या**दिषु **पञ्चतां** पञ्चगुणताम् नात्येति । स्मृत्यन्तरे धान्ये चतुर्गुणोक्ता "हिरण्यवस्त्रधान्यानां वृद्धिर् द्वित्रिचतुर्गुणाः" (न्स्म् १.९२) इति । तत्र व्यवस्था- यदि दरिद्रभूतः प्रयोक्ता ग्रहीता च महाधनसंपन्नस् तेन धान्येन महान्तम् अर्थं कृतवांस् तदा पञ्चगुणान्यथा चतुर्गणा । **सदं**[^३३२] फलं वार्षम्, धान्यस्य पृथगुपादानात् । लव[^३३३] उदीच्येषूर्णाविषयः प्रसिद्धः । **वाह्यो** गर्दभोष्ट्रबलीवर्दादिः ॥ ८.१५१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Kusīda*,’ ‘*monetary loans*’—the advancing of money for earning
interest; or the money advanced may itself be called ‘*Kusīda*’; *i.e*.,
the money which is advanced with the idea ‘having advanced a small
amount I shall get back a larger amount.’

The interest on such loans ‘*shall not exceed the double*—the creditor,
having advanced the money to the debtor, shall receive from him only
such an amount as may be the double of his principal.

“What the text says is that the interest should become ‘Double’; and
this, along with the principal itself, should make the total amount
received *thrice* the principal.”

It is not so; in the term ‘*Dviguṇa*,’ ‘double,’ the term ‘*guṇa*’
signifies *part*; and when we come to look out for a *whole* of which it
would be the ‘*part*,’ it is the *principal* which, from the context,
appears to us as the ‘whole.’ Hence when the text speaks of the
‘double,’ what is meant is the double of the capital advanced. To this
end we have other Smṛti-texts—(*a*) ‘When there is delay, the capital
advanced shall become doubled’ (Gautama, 12. 81); and (*b*) ‘The deposit
is to be redeemed when the principal has become doubled’ (Yājñavalkya,
Vyavahāra, 64).

‘Interest’ is paid in several forms:—(1) when coins are advanced,
interest is paid in coins; (2) sometimes it is paid in the form of
progeny; as in the case of female cattle; (3) sometimes in the form of
the use of pledges, in the shape of cattle, land and the like.

The doubling of the interest is, according to some people, meant to
pertain to those cases where the interest paid is of the same kind as
the capital advanced; and the reason for this lies in the fact that it
is only in such cases that the exact ‘double’ can be ascertained; while
in the case of interest in the form of ‘progeny’ of animals, it cannot
be ascertained whether the ‘doubling’ is to be computed by *number*, or
size or measure; as in the case of such animals as elephants and horses,
it is found that when they are bought or sold, their price depends upon
their size; as a rule animals of larger size fetching higher prices.

“There is similarity of kind in the *progeny* also; the progeny of the
cow is of the same species as the cow. So that there is no justification
for any distinction as that into (*a*) ‘interest of the same kind’ and
(*b*) ‘progeny.’”

The answer to this is as follows:—‘Sameness of kind’ does not depend
only upon belonging to the same species; in fact it depends upon
similarity of age, size and other factors. Hence the distinction is
quite correct. Further, in the case of interest in the form of the *use
of deposits* also, how would the ‘double’ be determined? And when cows
and lands are pledged, the benefit derived from the use of the cow is in
the form of *milk*, while in the case of land, it is in the form of
fodder and other produce; so that in these cases also what sort of
‘double’ would there be? In actual usage it is found that if the
principal gold is not paid, land continues to be used and enjoyed for
hundreds of years. Says Yāyñavalkya (*Vyavahāra*, 90)—‘The pledge
continues to be enjoyed so long as the capital is not paid off.’ \[From
all this it is dear that the limit of ‘double’ cannot he applicable to
all cases.\]

Our answer to this explanation of some people is as follows:—When what
is asserted is the ‘doubling’ in regard to ‘interest’ in general, how
can we restrict it to any particular kind of interest only? When the
words of the text afford a certain meaning in a general form, we cannot
restrict it to any particular case, unless there is some authority for
doing it. As regards the argument that “there can be no *doubling*,’ in
the case of *progeny*,”—ju st please make an effort to understand the
matter: when an animal is pledged, its value is duly determined, and
certainly the value of its progeny also could be similarly determined.
Similarly in the case of the enjoyment of landed property also, when the
fodder and grains become ripened, it can he easily determined when their
value becomes equivalent to the principal.

Then again, the term ‘*Guṇa*’ (contained in ‘*dviguṇa*,’ ‘double’)
signifies *usefulness* also. “in that case what is there that would be
as *useful* as the principal?” It can always be found if a certain thing
serves any useful purpose at all. And if the interest accruing he
computed only at the price obtained from the sale of the grain and
fodder produced from the land,—then also it would be possible for the
interest to become equivalent to the principal,—even though there may be
no exact equality of size and other details.

As for the ‘local custom’ that you have put forward,—that argument has
been answered by yourself, when you called it ‘local.’ further, whenever
there is any chance of customs being abandoned, it is Smṛti-texts that
serve the useful purpose of affording the requisite check.

As regards the text—‘the pledge is enjoyed so long as the principal is
not paid up,’—the phrase ‘so long as the principal is not paid up’ can
he taken to mean ‘so long as it has not become doubled.’ In fact, with a
view to reconciling it with other Smṛti-texts, it is best to take it in
this sense. This has been fully explained by us elsewhere.

‘*Stipulated at one time*’—*i.e*., what has been fixed upon at one time,
in eases of the renewal of the loan. ‘Stipulating’ means *fixing*; and
what is settling by verbal contract is also *fixing*. The loan is
renewed, when the principal has become doubled and is not paid up. Even
after the principal has been doubled, if the creditor is willing to earn
further interest on it, and the debtor also wishes to retain the money
for the purpose of currying on some large business, he renews the deed,
entering as principal, the former principal along with the accrued
interest, and thenceforward it is on this principal that the interest
begins to accrue. And in that case, the principal, even though doubled,
continues to grow further.

It continues to grow also when transferred to another person; for
instance, when the principal has become doubled and the creditor has
need of the money and asks the debtor to pay, the latter takes him to a
third party, and says^(‘)this man will make the payment for me in so
many days’; and in this case during these additional days, further
interest shall accrue. The third party in this case is not a ‘surety’
for payment, but only a ‘trustee,’ the man who actually does the
payment. This is what has been explained by Ṛju to be the meaning of the
debt being ‘transferred to another person.’

Or. ‘transference to another person’ may refer to the following
transaction:—Even before the principal has become actually doubled, if
the pledge is banded over to another person,—when the money with accrued
interest has become doubled, then it is only right and proper that the
pledge should be redeemed; but in this case it is taken away before the
principal has reached the limit,—then, interest begins to accrue from
that date, and the limit of ‘double’ shall be computed upon the total
amount of the principal along with the interest accrued up to the date
of the transference. That is, when the creditor, with the sanction of
the debtor, hands over the latter’s pledge to a third party and receives
his due from him, then the interest continues to accrue.

In both these cases (of ‘transference to another person’), before the
doubling of the principal, the money-lender is, somehow or other, made
to agree to receive payment from another person; or, ‘transference to
another person’ may mean that case where the debtor takes a further loan
from the creditor, but having to go away to foreign lands, transfers the
loan by means of another document.

Ṛju however holds that, except in the case of the same debtor renewing
the loan, no interest beyond the doubling of the principal can accrue.
It is in accordance with this view that he has declared—‘In the case of
transference to another person, there should be renewal of the deed, and
the need for this we shall explain.’

Some people have held the following view:—“The rule laid down in the
present text refers to a case where the whole amount of interest
accruing during the year is *paid at one time* \[this being the meaning
of the phrase ‘*sakṛdāhiṭā* \]; whereas if all the interest that has
fallen due is not paid off wholly, then it will go on accruing, even
beyond the limit of ‘double the principal.’”

But in this explanation, neither the negative particle ‘*na*’ nor the
term ‘*āhita*’ retains its real meaning. For if the interest accrued
during the first year has been received, and at the end of the second
year, the interest is again brought up for payment,—where would there be
any chance of the principal becoming doubled?

“The prohibition of excess may apply to a case where the debtor brings
up for payment the amount of the principal which has become doubled with
accrued interest. Even before the principal becomes doubled, if the
debtor is able to pay up the interest only, he can do so, and there can
be no limit placed upon the principal to be accepted.”

This view also is nothing. When the debtor is ready to pay up, he
deserves favourable consideration, and he should not be made to pay
more; and if a debtor is forced by the king to pay up, it cannot be
right to remit the excess in his case. Nor does the term ‘*āhitā*’ of
the text mean this.

If the word is read as ‘*āhṛtā*,’ then the exact signification of the
term ‘*sakṛt*’ would be doubtful; reason would be scattered to the
wings, and the text would he a self-conceived one, and not the one
propounded by Manu.

From all this it follows, that the most reasonable conclusion is as
explained by us above.

In the case of grains and other things, it does not exceed the
‘*quintuple*’—*i.e*., five times.

Another Smṛti text lays down ‘quadruple’ in the case of grains:—‘In the
case of gold, cloth and grains, the interest is to be double, triple and
quadruple respectively’ (Nārada, 107). And the law on this point is as
follows: If the moneylender has become reduced to poverty, and the
debtor has become opulent with much wealth, having earned much wealth by
means of the grain he had borrowed,—then the interest is to be *five
times*; and in other cases it is to be only *four times*.

‘*Sada*’—stands for the *fruit of trees*,—‘grains’ being mentioned
separately.

‘*Lava*’—stands, among northerners, for *wool*.

‘*Beasts of burden*’—ass, camel, ox and so forth.—(151)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Smṛtyantare*’—(Medhātithi, p. 967, l. 30)—see Yājñavalkya (2. 39
)—‘*Vastradhānyahiraṇyānām catustridviguṇā parā*’, and in *Nārada*
(107)—‘*Hiraṇyadhānyavastrāṇām vṛddhirdvitricaturguṇā*.’

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.39), which adds the following
notes:—Capital invested for increase is called ‘*kusīda*’,—the increase
thereof is called ‘*vṛddhi*’;—and this never goes beyond, exceeds, the
double,—if it is the first original investment; in the case of the
investment being one that has been transferred from one person to
another, it *can* exceed the double,—as it becomes, in tins case, a
fresh transaction.—If we adopt the reading ‘*āhṛtā*’ (in place of
‘*āhitā*’), the meaning would he that the amount cannot exceed the
double only in the case where the interest is paid all at one time, and
that in a case where it is paid by gradual instalments—daily, monthly or
yearly,—it does exceed the double. It goes on—‘The rule applies to cases
where the loan has been advanced in one instalment, and is also paid
back in one instalment; in cases where the loan has been transferred to
another person, or a fresh transaction is entered into by the same
parties after certain additions and subtractions, the interest does go
on accumulating even after the principal, along with the interest, has
reached the amount which is double of the original principal.—On the
second half of the verse it remarks that in the case of grains and roots
and flowers and fruits, the quantity payable may become five times of
the principal. It explains ‘*śada*’ as *agricultural products*, fruits,
flowers etc.,—‘*lava*’ as the wool of sheep, the hair of the *camarī*
cow find so forth,—‘*vāhya*’ as ‘bullocks, horses and the like.’
Interest on these cannot go beyond five times the principal.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 643), which adds that the term ‘*sakṛt*’
makes it clear that the amount can exceed the double, in a case where
with the consent of the debtor the accrued interest is added on to the
principal and a fresh transaction entered into. It adds that this
applies only to transactions in *gold*.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 76), which adds that Vijñaneśvara
and others have held that in a case where interest has been paid by
instalments at intervals, the total amount of the amount to be paid
ultimately may exceed the double.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 17), which adds the following
explanatory notes:—‘*Dhānye*’, barley, *vrīhi* and the rest,—‘*sade*’,
fruits and other products from trees,—‘*lave*’, wool of the sheep, hair
of the *Camarī* and so forth, the etymological meaning being ‘what is
shorn’, ‘*lūyate*’;—‘*vāhye*’, ‘what is *driven*’, the horse and so
forth;—if any of these things is lent, on interest, like gold and
silver,—the amount to be paid should not exceed five times the
principal. It is just possible that some one may borrow a hundredweight
of grains, or a hundred horses, on loan at the rate of 2 per cent
interest;—such a debtor, even after a very long time, can repay only
*five hundred*, not more. The present text lays down ‘five times’ as the
limit in the case of grain; but Bṛhaspati has fixed this limit at ‘four
times’; while ‘three times’ is the limit fixed by Viṣṇu, Marīci,
Vaśiṣṭha and Hārīta. In view of these alternative limits, the decision
in any particular case will have to be determined by the character of
the debtor concerned, or the nature of the time, and consideration of
scarcity or affluence.

This verse is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, 18b);—in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 326), which explains ‘*sada*’ as the produce of
cultivation, other than, corn,—*e.g*., fruits and other
things,—‘*vāhya*’ as ‘bullock and the rest’,—and ‘*lava*’ as ‘wool and
the like;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 11), which says that at one
transaction, in the case of gems and things of that kind also, the
interest cannot go beyond the double;—that in grains etc. it can go upto
fivefold; but in repeated transactions it can go beyond the said
‘double’; it notes the reading ‘*sakṛdāhitā*’; it explains ‘*vāhya*’
as‘bullock and the like’,—‘*śada*’ as ‘field-prodce’,—‘*lava*’ as ‘that
which is lopped off’, *i.e*., wool, except that of the sheep.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (12.31, 36).—‘If the loan remains outstanding for a long time,
the principal may bo doubled; after which the interest ceases. The
interest on animal-products, on wool, on agricultural produce, and on
beasts of burden shall not increase more than the live-fold value of the
object lent,’

*Viṣṇu* (6.11-14, 16, 17).—‘On gold, the interest shall rise no higher
than to make the debt double; on grain, three-fold; on cloth, fourfold;
on liquids eight-fold; on substances from which spirituous liquor is
extracted, on cotton, thread, leather, weapons, bricks, and charcoal,
the interest is unlimited; on objects other than those just mentioned,
it may be double.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.39).—‘For cattle and for women, the interest consists
in the form of their offspring; in the case of clarified butter and
other *Rasas*, the highest limit of interest is eight-fold; in that of
cloth, fourfold; in that of grains, threefold; and in that of gold,
double.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 643).—‘The money-lender shall receive double
the amount lent.’

*Nārada* (1.105-107).—‘There are special rules according to the local
usages of the country where the loan has been made. In some countries
the loan may grow till the amount of the principal has been reached; in
other countries it may grow till it becomes three, or four, or eight
times as large as the principal. The interest on gold, grain and clothes
may rise to two, three, or four times the principal. On liquids, the
interest may become octuple; of women and cattle, their offspring forms
the interest.

*Bṛhaspati* (11.13-16).—‘On gold and other precious metals, the interest
may make the debt double; on clothes and base metals, treble; on grain,
it is allowed to rise to four times the original amount; and so on
edible plants or fruits, beasts of burden and wool. It is allowed to
make the debt quintuple on pot-herbs; sextuple, on seeds and sugarcane;
and octuple, on salt, oil and spirituous liquor. Likewise on sugar and
honey, if the loan he of old standing. On grass, wood, bricks, thread,
substances from which spirits may he extracted, leaves, hones, leather,
weapons, flowers and fruits, no interest is ordained.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.631).—‘When the amount drawn from the debtor in the
form of interest has reached twice the principal, then the King shall
make the debtor pay only the principal and nothing more than that.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 17).—‘For gems, pearls, corals, for
gold and silver—and for agricultural products and for insect-products
(silk, etc.),—the interest shall stop at double of the principal. For
oils, wines, clarified butter, molasses and salt, it shall go up to
eight-fold.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**वृद्धिर् द्वैगुण्यं नात्येति** । कालमहत्त्वे ऽपि सति । **सकृद् आहिता** पुरुषान्तरम् असंक्रान्ता, संक्रमिते तु धने प्रयोक्त्रान्यत्र पुनर्वर्धत एव, गृहीतृदोषाद् अप्रतिपादनेन पूर्वं प्रयोक्तुर् धनस्य । हिरण्ये तावद् एवम् । **धान्ये** तु फलकाले **शद**काले प्रतिवर्षं भागशो वर्धमानं तत् प्रयुक्तं धान्यं **नातिक्रामति पञ्चताम्** । हिरण्यवद् द्वैगुणे प्राप्ते इदं तत्प्रतिषेधार्थं पञ्चगुणत्वम् आरभ्यते । एवं **शदे** पञ्चतां परिवर्तमानो **नातिक्रामति** । एवं **लवे** प्रयुक्त ऽव्याद्यूर्णाजानां लवकाले लवकाले भागशो वर्धते तत्प्रयुक्तम् । **वाह्ये** तु बलीवर्दादाव् एष एव न्यायः ॥ ८.१५० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

151	In money transactions interest paid at one time (not by instalments) shall never exceed the double (of the principal); on grain, fruit, wool or hair, (and) beasts of burden it must not be more than five times (the original amount).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/152_kRtAnusArAd_adhikA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>152 कृतानुसाराद् अधिका ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

कृतानुसाराद् अधिका  
व्यतिरिक्ता न सिध्यति ।  
कुसीदपथम् आहुस् तं  
पञ्चकं शतम् अर्हति  ॥ ८.१५२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/152_kRtAnusArAd_adhikA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Interest, stipulated in contravention of the law, being excessive, is not payable. They declare this to be the usurer’s way. It is only five per cent. to which the man is entitled.—(152)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अनुसरन्त्य् अनुधावन्त्य् अनुवर्तन्ते सर्व एवार्था एतम् इत्य् **अनुसारः** । शास्त्रोदितः समाचारः । स च विविधो ऽशीतिभागादिः पञ्चकशतपर्यन्तः । तस्माद् **अधिका** वृद्धिः **कृता** यावत् तथाधमर्णेनोत्तमर्णस्य **न सिध्यति** । कुतः, **व्यतिरिक्ता** यतः शास्त्रबाह्येत्य् अर्थः । 

- अर्थवादान्तरम् आह । **कुसीदपथम् आहुस् तम्** इति । कुपुरुषा यत्र सीदन्ति **कुशीदम्** । धर्मेण तद् धनिनो लक्ष्यन्ते । कुशीदीनाम् अयं **पन्था** मार्गो व्यवहारो न साधूनाम् इति निन्दा । यस्यावश्यम् अधिका कर्तव्या — महद् धि कार्यम् अयं मदीयेन धनेन साधयतीति बुद्ध्या — तदा वर्णविभागम् अनपेक्ष्य[^३३४] **पञ्चकं शतं** ग्रहीतुम् **अर्हति** लिप्सेत्, तदर्थम्[^३३५] इदम् उच्यते । 


[^३३५]:
     M G DK (1:615) omit: tad-


[^३३४]:
     M G: anapekṣyaṃ

पाठान्तरम् "कृता तु साराद् अधिका"[^३३६] इति । यस्याकिंचनस्य सतः स्वल्पा कृता, तेनैव धनेनान्यथा वा महार्थतां प्राप्तस् तस्य या पुरुषसाराद् अधिका[^३३७] **न सिध्यति**, यः परं पञ्चकशतम् अर्हति ॥ ८.१५२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Anusāra*’ is that which is followed in all matters; *i.e*., the law
laid down by the scriptures. The law in relation to interests is
diverse: one lays down the rate as the eightieth part of the hundred,
and another as five per cent, if the rate of interest is stipulated ‘*in
contravention of*’— in excess of—these sanctioned rates,—it is ‘*not
payable*’—by the debtor to the creditor.—Why?—Because it is
‘*excessive*’—*i.e*., against the law.

In support of this the text puts forward a commendatory
declaration—‘*this they declare to be the usurer’s way*.’ The term
‘*kusīda*’—means *that which is followed by evil persons*; and then the
persons themselves. This ‘*way*’—path, conduct—is of evil persons, and
not of good men. This is a deprecation of the act referred to.

If the lender is anxious to make as much money as possible out of the
transaction, under the impression that the borrower is going to carry on
extensive business with the help of the capital he is going to lend,
then he may obtain *five per cent*., irrespectively of the caste of the
borrower. What is meant is that this is all that he should seek to
obtain.

Another reading is ‘*kṛtā tu sārādadhikā*’; and the meaning of the text
would in that case he that—‘if, at the outset, on account of the man’s
poverty, a low rate of interest is fixed, but subsequently, the man
having acquired much wealth, if, *on account of his
opulence*—‘*sārāt*’—a large rate is demanded, this cannot he payable,
since all that the man is entitled to is *five per cent*.—(152)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse in quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 14), which adds the
following explanations:—Any interest, over and above what has been
prescribed in the scriptures,—such as

2 per cent and so forth,—cannot be permitted, even though agreed to by
the debtor;—why?—because they declare this to be the ‘usurious way’. If,
under the stress of business, the creditor wishes to reap a large profit
out of the debtor, then the utmost that he can recover is 5 per
cent,—and not more, even though the debtor may have agreed to it;—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (p. 68b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bṛhaspati* (11.9, 10-12).—‘That interest has always to be paid which
has been stipulated by the debtor himself, over and above the ordinary
rate of interest, and has been promised in times of distress; when such
special interest has been stipulated in any other manner, it must not be
paid by any means. The use of a pledge after twice the principal has
been realised from it, compound interest, and the exaction of the
principal and interest together (as principal) are usury and are
reprehensible.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यो हि कार्यवर्त्तां विज्ञाय गृहीतुः पञ्चकाच् छताद् अधिकं वृद्धिं कारयेत् प्रयोक्ता न तस्य साकार्यसिद्धिं गच्छेत् । शास्त्रव्यतिरेकाद् धेतोः । यतः **पञ्चकम्** एव **शतं** दातुम् **अर्हति** । अथ वा **कृता** तु वृद्धिर् अविशेष्या ग्रहणकाले विशेष्या वा अल्पान् न किंचनास्य गृहीतुः पूर्वम्, पश्चाद् धनव्यवहारेणैव प्राप्तैश्वर्यस्य, अन्यथा वा, पुरुषकारात् संपल्लक्षणाद् अधिका, यथा मन्दीकृता तत्प्रयोक्तृलोभाद् उत्तरकालं गृहीतुः संपदपेक्षया, न सिध्यति, शास्त्रव्यतिरेकाद् धेतोः । तत्र हि सर्वमहती वृद्धिः पञ्चकं शतम् । तद् अपि शूद्रविषयम् । कामम् अशूद्रस्यापि तावती स्याद् वृद्धिः, नातो व्यतिरिक्ता । तथा च निन्द्यते, कुसीदपथम् आहुस् तम् इति ॥ ८.१५१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

152	Stipulated interest beyond the legal rate, being against (the law), cannot be recovered; they call that a usurious way (of lending); (the lender) is (in no case) entitled to (more than) five in the hundred.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/153_nA-ti-sAMvatsarIM_vRddhim.md">
<details open><summary><h3>153 नाऽति-सांवत्सरीं वृद्धिम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

नाऽति-सांवत्सरीं वृद्धिं  
न चाऽदृष्टां पुनर् हरेत् [मेधातिथिपाठः - विनिर्हरेत्] ।  
चक्रवृद्धिः कालवृद्धिः  
कारिता कायिका च या  ॥ ८.१५३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/153_nA-ti-sAMvatsarIM_vRddhim.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One shall not pay or receive an interest beyond the annual, or what is unapproved (or unaccumulated); nor compound interest, nor periodical interest, nor that which is (privately) stipulated, nor corporeal.—(153)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

संवत्सरे भवा **सांवत्सरी** । ताम्[^३३९] **अति**क्रान्ता **सांवत्सरी** । भवप्रत्ययार्थः सामर्थ्याद् अन्तर्भूतः । अथ वा संवत्सरम् अतिक्रान्ता **अतिसंवत्सरेति** प्राप्ते वृद्धीकारौ छन्दस्तुल्यत्वात् कर्तव्यौ । 


[^३३९]:
     M G omit: tām

येषां वृद्धिर् अनन्तप्रक्रान्तपञ्चकं[^३४०] शतं सर्ववर्णविषया सा संवत्सरं यावद् ग्रहीतव्या, नातीते संवत्सरे । अथ वा यावत् संवत्सरम् । संवत्सरो वर्षः । तावद्[^३४१] वृद्धिर् न मार्गिणीया[^३४२] । अधमर्णेनापि संवत्सराद् ऊर्ध्वं न विलंबितव्यम् ।   

**विनिर्हरेद्** विनिष्कृष्य स्वधनाद् आरभ्योपनयेद् इत्य् अर्थः । अर्वाग् अपि संवत्सराद् या दीयते साप्य् अतिक्रान्तसंवत्सरैव । 


- अथ वा मासाद् आरभ्य संवत्सरस्य यावद् वृद्धिः परिमाणतो निरूपितव्या । मासेन यद् वर्द्धते संवत्सरेण वेत्य् एवं प्रयोगः कर्तव्यः, न तु संवत्सरद्वयस्य लाभार्थी कदाचिच् चिरकालं ग्राहयति किं मे कतिपयमासिकेन[^३४३] लाभेन यदि द्वे वर्षे ततो ऽधिकं वा गृह्णासि, तद्ग्रहणे एषा वेयता कालेन वृद्धिस् तत्रार्वाचीनम् अपि ददद् अधर्मर्णे द्विसांवत्सरीं यथाकालकृतां तदा दाप्येत । "एकां वृद्धिम् अनादेयां न दद्यान् नापि दापयेत्" इति । यथा मासिकी वृद्धिः प्रथमे मासि द्वितीय एवाह्नि शोधयन् दाप्यते तथा यदैवम् अभ्युपैति संवत्सरेण यद् वर्धत इति तदा तथैव दाप्यते, न तु तदधिककालकृता । 


[^३४३]:
     M G: katipayā māsikena; DK: katipayāḥ | māsikena

**न चादृष्टां विनिर्हरेत्** । शास्त्रे या न दृष्टा दशैकादशिकाद्या पञ्चकाद् अधिका न तां गृह्णीयात् । "व्यतिरिक्ता न सिध्यति" (म्ध् ८.१५२) इत्य् अस्यैवायम् अनुवाद इति <u>केचित्</u> । इदं तु युक्तम् । **अदृष्टाम्** अनुपचिताम् इत्य् अर्थः । यावद् बहुभिर् मासैर् न संहतीभूता तावन् न ग्राह्या दिवसवृद्धिर् मासवृद्धिः ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च "मासस्य वृद्धिं[^३४४] गृह्णीयात्" (म्स्ह् ८.१४२) इत्य् उक्तम् । 


[^३४४]:
     M G: vṛddhir

<u>परिमाणं</u> मासिकं तद्वृद्धेर् न तु ग्रहणम् ।   
**चक्रवृद्धिः कालवृद्धिः कारिका कायिका च या**, ताम् अपि न **विनिर्हरेद्** इत्य् अनुषङ्गः । नैवादद्याद् इति[^३४५] । यद्य् अप्य् अधमर्णस्य[^३४६] प्रतिषेधस् तथापि सामर्थ्याद् उत्तमर्णस्यैव द्रष्टव्यः । अधमर्णो ह्य् आर्तः किं न करोति । अथ वा विनिर्हारो ग्रहणम् एव । तेनोत्तमर्णस्यैव शाब्दः प्रतिषेधः ।



[^३४६]:
     M G: yasyādhamarṇasya


[^३४५]:
     M G DK omit: iti

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च द्विकादिवृद्धिविधानाच् चक्रवृद्ध्यादीनान् प्राप्तिर् एव नास्ति । किं प्रतिषेधानुषङ्गेण ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;उच्यते । अप्राप्तः प्रतिषेधः पाक्षिकीं वृद्धिम् अनुमापयति । यथाधाने न ब्रह्मसामाभिगायेद् इत्य् अविहितं सामगानं प्रतिषेधेनास्तीति ज्ञापयति । तेनैता अपि प्रतिषेधद्वारेणाभ्यनुज्ञायन्ते । केषांचिद् दूरव्यवहारिणां[^३४७] चक्रवृद्ध्यादयो ऽपि भवन्ति । तेन स्थलपथवारिपथिका वणिजो यथोक्तम्-


[^३४७]:
     M G J: ūnavya-

- कान्तारगास् तु दशकं सामुद्रा विंशकं शतम् ।

- दद्युर् वा स्वकृतां वृद्धिं सर्वे सर्वासु जातिषु ॥ इति । (य्ध् २.४१)

कान्तारगादीनाम् एव स्वकृता सर्वजातिविषया साधारणी वृद्धिर् न त्व् अन्येषाम् । तत्र चक्रवृद्धिः स्मृत्यन्तरे पठिता- "वृद्धेर् वृद्धिश् चक्रवृद्धिः" (न्स्म् १.८९) ।

<u>अन्ये तु</u> चक्रवद्यानं गन्त्र्यादि,[^३४८] तद्वृद्धिश् चक्रवृद्धिः । तेषां यस्मिन्न् अहनि चक्रं वर्तते तत्रैव वृद्धिः । यदा तु नदीसंतारे दुर्दिनादिना अप्रयाणं तदा नास्ति वृद्धिः । एवम् अन्येषाम् अपि बलीवर्दादिवाह्यप्रयोक्तॄणाम् ईदृशी वृद्धिश् चक्रवृद्दिर् उच्यते ।  
**कालवृद्धिः** "प्रतिमासं तु कालिका" (च्ड़्। न्स्म् १.८८) । मासग्रहणम् उपलक्षणार्थम् । यानुपचिता वृद्धिर् दिवसे दिवसे गृह्यते मासि मासि वा यस्याः कालो न प्रतीक्ष्यते अथ चैतस्मिन् काले यदि न[^३४९] ददासि तदा द्विगुणीभवति धनम् इत्य् एकरूपा कालवृद्धिः ।   

**कारिता** । इत्थंकृतां यावती वा परस्परोपकारापेक्षयोत्तमर्णाधर्मर्णौ कुरुतः । एषापि दिग्भागवणिजाम् एव । अन्येषां तु "व्यतिरिक्ता न सिध्यति" इत्य् उक्तम्, "पञ्चकं शतम् अर्हति" (म्ध् ८.१५२) इति । 

- अथ वा[^३५०] हिरण्ये प्रयुक्ते वासांसि वृद्ध्या गृह्यन्ते, तत्राधिलक्षणं द्रव्यम्, सा **कारिता,** यथाभोगलाभे न्यासरूपविषये च स्यात् । 


[^३५०]:
     M G omit: atha vā

**कायिका** कायकर्मणा संशोध्या । कायजीविका च, एषां क्रमेण क्रमेलकादिजीविनाम्[^३५१] ॥ ८.१५३ ॥


[^३५१]:
     M G J: kācaivādhikādīnām
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Sāmvatsarī*’—*means* ‘*pertaining to the samvatsara*,’ ‘*annual*’;
what is in excess of this ‘*is atisāmvatsarī*,’ ‘*beyond the annual*’;
the idea of *pertinence* being implied by the nominal affix. Or we may
first form the compound ‘*atisamvatsara*’ in the sense of ‘beyond the
year,’ and then have the vowel-changes, giving the form
‘*atisāmvatsarī*.’

The interest that has been sanctioned in connection with all castes,—at
the rate of 5 per cent, shall be realised for one year, and after the
lapse of the year. Or, the meaning may be that no interest shall be
realised during the year,—and after the year the debtor shall not delay
the payment of interest.

‘*Nirharet*,’ ‘*shall pay*,’—*i.e*., taking out of his own stock, offer
to the creditor; what is paid before the year has expired would also be
‘*beyond* *the* *annual*.’

Or, the meaning may be that at the time of the transaction itself, it
shall be determined whether the interest shall be computed monthly or
yearly. It would not be right for a man desirous of earning interest for
two years, to make the other party accept the loan for that long period
the idea in his mind being—‘what would be the use of earning the
interest for a few months only?—if the principal is allowed to remain
with him for two years, then I shall earn a decent interest.’ In such a
case the man would so arrange the advance to the debtor that the
interest would be paid after two years. That such a course would not be
right is clearly indicated by such texts as—‘one shall neither pay, nor
cause another to pay, interest in such a single instalment as may be
beyond the power of the man to pay.’ In the case of interest payable
monthly, the debtor is made to pay the interest on the second day after
the lapse of the month; similarly when the stipulation is that the
interest shall be paid yearly, it should be paid on the second day after
the lapse of the year,—and not computed by any longer time.

Nor shall he receive what is ‘*adṛṣṭā*’ ‘unapproved’;—*i.e*., a rate not
sanctioned by the scriptures;—*i.e*., rates above 5 per cent., such as
10 per cent., or 11 per cent.

Some people hold that this is only a reiteration of what has been said
(under 152) that ‘an excessive rate of interest is not payable.’

The right explanation of ‘*adṛṣṭā*’ therefore is ‘*unaccumulated*’;—the
meaning being that interest shall not be received by the clay, or by the
month, until it has accumulated during several months.

“But under 142 it has been declared that one may take ‘monthly
interest.’”

What is meant by that is that the interest shall he computed by the
month, and not that it shall be received month by month.

‘*Compound interest*’:—the various kinds of interest from here down to
the ‘*corporeal*,’ should be construed with ‘*he shall not pay*.’ Though
the prohibition is literally addressed to the debtor, yet it is really
meant to be addressed to the creditor; for the debtor, being in
distress,—what is there that he may not do?

Or, what is directly meant by ‘*nirharet*’ is *receiving* itself; so
that the prohibition would he addressed literally to the creditor
directly.

“In as much as the rates of interest have been fixed at 2, 3, 4 or 5 per
cent, there is no possibility of ‘compound interest’ being paid or
received: what then is the need of the present prohibition?”

Our answer is as follows:—This prohibition itself is indicative of the
fact that it is open to the creditor to charge such interest also. Just
as the prohibition that ‘the Brāhmaṇa shall not sing Sāman during
Fire-laying’ is indicative of the fact that though no such Sama-singing
is actually prescribed in connection with Fire-laying, yet it is open to
the priest to do it. Thus the possibility of the various kinds of
interest here mentioned being charged is indicated by this prohibition
itself. For instance, in the case of men carrying on inferior kinds of
business, the ‘compound’ and other interests are actually paid; it is
thus that in connection with traders on land and water, etc., varying
rates of interest have been prescribed: ‘Those trading in forests should
pay ten per cent., those on the sea twenty per cent.; or among all
castes people may pay any interest that has been stipulated among
themselves’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*, 38). ‘Interest stipulated among
themselves’ has thus been sanctioned by this other Smṛti-text among all
castes, in relation to only those that trade in the forest, etc.; so
that ‘compound interest’ is not permissible in other eases.

Interest charged on interest is called ‘*compound interest*,’
‘*cakravṛddhi*.’ Others however explain the term ‘*cakravṛddhi*’ as
‘wheel-interest’; that in the case of wheeled conveyances, like the
cart, etc., interest is paid only for those days on which they are used;
and on days when the man has to go by boat, in the crossing of large
rivers, no interest is paid. In the case of oxen and other things that
are used as conveyances, interest is paid in this same manner and it is
this that is called ‘wheel-interest.’

‘*Periodical interest*’;—“Interest computed month by month is called
‘periodical’”—says a text. But ‘month’ is mentioned only by way of
illustration; what is meant is that interest which is not allowed to
accumulate, being realised day by day, or month by month, and no time is
allowed. Another kind of ‘periodical interest’ is that in which the
creditor has stipulated—‘if you do not pay the interest at such and such
a time, my principal shall become doubled.’

‘*Privately stipulated*’;—when the creditor and the debtor tlx upon a
special rate of interest, in view of each other’s requirements. This
also is possible only in the case of distant traders. As for others, it
has been declared—‘successive interest is not payable’ and ‘he is
entitled to only 5 per cent.’

Or, when what is lent is *gold*, and what is received in interest is
*cloth*—whose real character is that of a *deposit*,—it is a case of
‘*privately stipulated*’ interest; and this would have the character of
usufruct, in the case of what has not been kept as a pledge.

‘*Corporeal*’—payable by bodily labour. This would be possible only in
the case of labourers...... (?)—(153)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘A creditor may take, for the term of a year, interest which has been
settled by the following agreement—“when one, two or three months have
passed, the interest on the capital shall be calculated and paid to me
at one time”; but he shall not take the interest according to the
agreement, if the year has passed’ (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘If the
creditor does not take the money due for two or three years, and the
debtor pays then, the creditor shall not take more interest than for one
year’ (Govindarāja).

‘*Adrṣṭam*’—‘Not found (in the *Śāstras*)’ (Medhātithi, Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda);—‘not accumulated by the lapse of several months’
(Medhātithi, alternatively and Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Kālavṛddhiḥ*’—‘Periodical (*i.e*., monthly) interest’ (Medhātithi,
Govindarāja, Nārāyaṇa and Kullūka, who is not rightly represented by
Buhler).—See Nārada —‘*Pratimāsam bhavantī yā vṛddhiḥ sā kālikā sṛmtā*
(*smṛta*?)’ (‘*kālikā*’ being the technical name for *monthly interest*,
*kālavṛddhiḥ*).

‘*Kāyikā*’—‘To be paid by bodily labour’ (Medhātithi),—or ‘by the use of
a pledged animal or slave’ (Medhātithi, alternative, Kullūka,
Rāghavānanda and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 9), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Atisāṃvatsarī*’ is that which has gone beyond a year.
The meaning is that if the creditor, suspecting an early repayment of
the loan, should stipulate that the loan must continue for a certain
time, then he cannot stipulate for more than a year. Halāyudha, however
holds the meaning to be that however much be the eagerness of the
creditor to earn much interest, he should receive payment before one
year passes, and not beyond that.—Nor should he receive an interest that
is ‘*adṛṣtā*,’ ‘not permitted by the scriptures.’—There are four kinds
of interest not permitted,—*cakravṛddhi*, *kālavṛddhi*, *kāritā* and
*kāyikā*; these he should not take.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 229);—in *Vīdhanapārijāta* (II, p.
252);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Āhnika, 36a);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (67b),
which adds the explanation.—‘The interest is to be calculated from the
first month upto the end of the year, and not beyond that.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (12.30, 34-35).—‘Some declare that the said rates of interest
should not be paid longer than a year. The following are the special
forms of interest:—Compound interest, Periodical interest, Stipulated
interest, Corporal interest, Daily interest and interest in the shape of
using the pledge.’

*Nārada* (l.102-104)—‘Interest has been declared in lawbooks to be of
four kinds:—Periodical, Stipulated, *Kāyikā*, and Compound. That which
runs by the month is Periodical interest; that promised by the debtor
himself is Stipulated interest; interest at the rate of one Paṇa and a
quarter, paid regularly without diminishing the principal, is denoted
*Kāyikā* interest; interest upon interest is called Compound interest.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.4-12).—‘Interest has been declared by some to be of four
kinds; by others, of five kinds; and by others again, of six kinds.
*Kāyikā*, *Kālikā*, *Cakravṛddhi*, *Kāritā*, *Śikhāvṛddhi*, and
*Bhogalābha*. *Kāyikā* interest is in the form of bodily labour;
*Kālikā* is what is due every month; *Cakravṛddhi* is interest on
interest; *Kāritā* is interest promised by the debtor; when interest is
received every day, it is called *Śikhāvṛddhi*; because it grows
constantly like *hair*, except on the loss of the head, that is, the
payment of the principal. The use of a mortgaged house, or the produce
of a field, is termed *Bhogalābha*. *Sikhā* interest, *Kāyikā* interest
and *Bhogalābha* interest shall be realised by the creditor so long as
the principal remains unpaid. But the use of a pledge after twice the
principal has been realised, compound interest, and the exaction of the
interest and the principal together are usury and are reprehensible.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.638).—‘Creditors take away people’s wealth by the
compound rate of interest; so the King should protect the people from
them.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **नातिसांवत्सरीं वृद्धिं**

**नातिसांवत्सरीं वृद्धिं** गृह्णीयात्, यदि वृद्धिमहत्त्वात् संवत्सर एव तद्धनं द्विगुणीभवति । अन्यथा तु परस्ताद् अपि संवत्सरस्य गृह्णीयात् यावत् तद्द्वैगुण्यम् । तथा च गौतमः- "चिरस्थाने द्वैगुण्यं प्रयोगस्य" इति । अन्ये तु लब्धीम् अपि वृद्धिम् अशीतिपञ्चाशद्भागलक्षणां नातिवत्सरीं मन्यन्ते, धर्म[विरोधात् त]स्याः ।

> **न चादृष्टाम् [पुनर्] **

शास्त्रैः स्वयंकल्पितां द्विकादिवृद्धिभ्यो ऽन्याम्

> **हरेत् ।**

अथ वादृष्टाम् अनुपचिताम् इत्य् अर्थः । प्रतिमासं न गृह्णीयात्, प्रतिमासोपजातांस् तु तावत् गृह्णीयात् यावद् द्वैगुण्यम् ।

> **[चक्रवृद्धिः कालवृद्धिः कारिता कायिका च या]  ॥ ८.१५२ ॥**

परस्परोपकारापेक्षया स्वयं कृता वृद्धिकल्पाभ्यनुज्ञायते चक्रवद् यानसंयुक्ता वृद्धिश् **चक्रवृद्धिः** । अथ वा चक्रवद् आवर्तते । प्रतिमासं या [वर्धते सा । कालवृद्धिः] काल्[आन्तरे ऽस्]यैतद् धनं वर्धते, न संप्रत्येव । एतच् च प्रीत्या कल्प्यते, स्वयम् अनुग्राह्यतया परस्य । अथ वा अस्मिन् काले अप्रयच्छतस् तथैव [वर्धते यथानिश्चितं] स्वयम् एव प्रयोक्त्रा गृहीत्रा च देशकालकार्यावस्थापेक्षया । इयं चाभिहितापवादकृतानुसाराद् अधिकेति । **कायिका** कायिककर्मसंशोध्या ॥ ८.१५२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

153	Let him not take interest beyond the year, nor such as is unapproved, nor compound interest, periodical interest, stipulated interest, and corporal interest.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/154_RNan_dAtum.md">
<details open><summary><h3>154 ऋणन् दातुम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ऋणं दातुम् अशक्तो यः  
कर्तुम् इच्छेत् पुनः क्रियाम् ।  
स दत्त्वा निर्जितां वृद्धिं  
करणं परिवर्तयेत्  ॥ ८.१५४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/154_RNan_dAtum.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who, unable to repay the debt, wishes to renew the contract, shall change the bond, after paying the accrued interest.—(154)


If by lapse of time the debtor becomes bereft of the capacity to pay, he should be made to pay the debt according to hit capacity, taking into consideration the time and place and the rate of interest.


atha śaktivihīnaḥ syād ṛṇī kālaviparyayāt | 
śakyaprekṣam ṛṇaṃ dāpyaḥ kāle deśe yathodayam ||
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वृद्धिद्विगुणीभूतम् **ऋणं** धनपरिक्षयाद् **दातुम् अशक्तो यः** **स** **पुनः क्रियाम्** कारयितव्यः । **करणं** लेख्यसाक्ष्यादि परिवर्तयितव्यः । **वृद्धिं** तु दद्यात् **निर्जिताम्**, यावती गणनया भवतीत्य् अर्थः । द्विगुणाद् अधिकं न ग्राह्यम् इति यद् उक्तं तस्यायम् अपवादः । नवो[^३५२] ह्य् अयं प्रयोग इति । कुतः पुनः द्वैगुण्यापवादार्थता । यावता नेह किंचिद् ईदृशं वचनम् अस्ति वृद्धिसहितं धनं वर्धते मूलधनं वा । केवलं पुनः क्रिया श्रूयते । सा च **करणं** **परिवर्तयेद्** इति व्याख्यान्तरेण व्याख्याता । 


[^३५२]:
     M G J: jayo

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;यदि न वर्धते किम् अर्थं तर्हि करणपरिवर्तनम् ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;उच्यते । शान्तलाभे धने ऽदीयमाने आलस्यादिसंभावना[^३५३] साक्षिणश् च दीर्घे गच्छति काले विस्मरेयुः । यथोक्तम् ।


[^३५३]:
     M G: yā gantryādisaṃbhāvanā; J: yogakrayādisaṃbhāvanā (we have here three different readings from the three editions; clearly a defective reading here, which the editors attempted to correct)

- यत्र कार्ये भवेद् येन कृतोपेक्षा दशाब्दिकी ।

- विवादस् तत्र नैव स्यात् साहसेषु विशेषतः ॥

तथा "दशवर्षोपेक्षितम् ऋणम् असाध्यम्" (कश् ३.११.१३) इति । तथाच पूर्वे स्म व्याचक्षते । 

- अयं च राज्ञः उपदेशः पीडितस्यानुग्रहः । यदि च द्विगुणस्य नवीकरणेन पुनः प्रयोगो[^३५४] वृद्धिसहितस्य पुनर् वृद्धिर् महांश् च[^३५५] पीडितस्यानुग्रहः । अथ सर्वं तदानीम् अवष्टभ्य न दाप्यते, एषो ऽनुग्रहो निर्धनस्य । ईदृशो ऽनुग्रहो दैवेनैव कृतः । तथा च सर्वस्मृतिष्व् अस्याम् अवस्थायां विहितम् ।


[^३५५]:
     M G: mahāśa; J: mahān ayaṃ


[^३५४]:
     M G: prayoge

- अथ शक्तिविहीनः स्याद् ऋणी कालविपर्ययात् ।

- प्रेक्ष्य शक्तिम्[^३५६] ऋणं दाप्यः काले देशे यथोदयम् ॥


[^३५६]:
     M G: prekṣyaś ca tam; DK: prekṣya ca tam

यद्य् अधमर्णो दैवदोषान् निर्धनीभूतस् तदा न दुर्गावरोधादिना राज्ञा पीडयितव्यः । किं तर्हि कर्तव्यम् । यदास्य कथंचिद् धनं भवेत् तदा यथासंभवं शनैः शनैर् दापयितव्यः । "प्रेक्ष्य शक्तिम्" धनवत्तां[^३५७] ज्ञात्वेत्य् अर्थः । दाप्य्ः उचितस्य । वक्ष्यति "कर्मणापि समं कुर्यात्" (म्ध् ८.१७७) इति । तस्मात् कारणपरिवृत्तौ[^३५८] यद् एवोक्तम् अस्माभिस् तद् एव प्रयोजनम् ॥ ८.१५४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If a man, having his wealth reduced, is unable to pay the doubled
principal, he should be made to renew the contract, and to ‘*change*
*the deed*’—*i.e*., the document properly attested. But he should pay
the interest that has already accrued.

This is an exception to what has been said as to the creditor not
receiving more than double of bis principal;—since the loan-transaction
remains in force.

“How does it follow that there is an exception to the non-exceeding of
the double?”

Because in this case there is nothing to show whether further interest
accrues upon the principal along with the accrued interest, or upon the
principal only; all that is mentioned is the ‘renewal of the contract,’
which is explained in other words—‘he shall *change the bond*.’

“If further interest does not accrue on past interest, for what purpose
should the bond be altered?”

The answer is as follows:—When interest has ceased to accrue, and the
money is not paid, there is every possibility of laxity (on the part of
the debtor), and of the witnesses (of the old document), forgetting all
about the transaction; and a debt thus ignored for ten years would
become non-payable; as has been declared in the following text.—‘Where a
document is ignored for ten years, there can be no suit on its basis;
especially in the case of assaults (?).’

This is how it has been explained by older writers.

The following verse (from Nārada, 131) lays down the favour that the
king may show towards the debtor:

> *If by lapse of time the debtor becomes bereft of the capacity to pay,
> he should be made to pay* *the debt according to hit capacity*,
> *taking into consideration the time and place and the rate of
> interest*.

\[The meaning of this is as follows\]—

If, through evil fate, the debtor becomes reduced to poverty, he shall
not he chastised with imprisonment in the jail and soforth. “What is
there to be done?” Whenever he should happen to have any property at
all, he should be made to repay the debt by small instalments;—this is
what is meant by the phrase ‘*according to his capacity*.’ This is what
is going to be described as—‘the debt should he liquidated even by
bodily labour, etc., etc.’ (8.177.)

In view of this text, the use of altering the bond is just as we have
explained above.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Karaṇa*’—‘Written bond’ (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘written bond and
witnesses’ (Medhātithi).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 193), which
adds the following explanation:—‘When the time for repayment arrives, if
the debtor, find himself unable to pay the whole amount due—the
principal along with accrued interest,—and the creditor is unwilling to
keep the loan hanging,—and should wish to renew the transaction on the
same terms, he should pay the accrued interest and renew the bond, dated
afresh with the new date.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 72), as laying down one of the
methods of ‘compound interest.’ It adds the following
notes:—‘*Nirjitām*,’ legally due to the creditor; of this accrued
interest he should pay either the whole, or a part only, and add the
remainder to the principal and renew the bond for the total;—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, 19b);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (80a), which
explains ‘*nirjitām*’ as ‘determined to have already accrued to the
creditor,’—and ‘*karaṇ* *am parivartayet*’ as ‘should write another
document attested by fresh witnesses’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 104a).

At the end of Adhyāya VIII, Mandlik has printed the following verse with
Medhātithi’s explanation thereupon—

> atha śaktivihīnaḥ syād ṛṇī kālaviparyayāt \|  
> śakyaprekṣam ṛṇaṃ dāpyaḥ kāle deśe yathodayam \|\|

This verse, though commented upon by Medhātithi, has been omitted by all
other commentators.

It is found in Nārada (131.) It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 71)
as from Nārada; it explains ‘*Śaktivihīnaḥ*’ as ‘without ability to
repay the debt,’ and ‘*kālaviparyayāt*’ as ‘on account of famine and so
forth.’

The verse is not Manu’s, it is Nārada’s; and it has been only quoted by
Medhātithi and explained by him in course of his comment on verse 159.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.154-155)  
**

*Nārada* (1.131, 134).—‘When a debtor has been disabled by a reverse of
fortune (from paying the debt), he shall be made to discharge the debt
gradually, according to bis means, as he happens to gain wealth. If the
debtor, owing to a calamity, has not means sufficient to discharge the
whole debt, the claim of the creditor shall be entered in a legal
document, specifying the caste (of the parties), their names and names
of their neighbours.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.47, 60).—‘A loan shall be restored on demand, if no time
has been fixed; or on the expiry of the time, if time has been fixed; or
when interest ceases. When the time fixed for payment has elapsed, and
the interest has ceased, the creditor may either recover his loan or
cause a new bond to be written in the form of compound interest.’

*Bhāradvāja* (Parāśaramādhava-Vyava., p. 193).—‘If the debtor has no
money to repay the debt, he shall liquidate it by giving grains, gold,
or cattle, or clothes, slaves or conveyances.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

मूलहिरण्यस्य पुनः क्रिया न वृद्धेः । कथम् । यो हि गृहीता मूलं वृद्धिं च दातुम् अशक्तः करणं साक्ष्यादि परिवर्तयितुम् इच्छेत्, स पूर्व**निर्जितां** **वृद्धिं** दत्वा मूलमात्रस्य **करणं परिवर्तयेत्** । न तत्र वृद्धिम् आरोपयेत् । यच् च दद्यात् तद् वृद्धितः शोधयेत्, न तु मूलतः । अयं च राज्ञ उपदेशः । पीडितस्य वृद्ध्या राज्ञैवाकारयितव्यम् ॥ ८.१५३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

154	He who, unable to pay a debt (at the fixed time), wishes to make a new contract, may renew the agreement, after paying the interest which is due.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/155_adarshayitvA_tatraiva.md">
<details open><summary><h3>155 अदर्शयित्वा तत्रैव ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अदर्शयित्वा तत्रैव  
हिरण्यं परिवर्तयेत् ।  
यावती संभवेद् वृद्धिस्  
तावतीं दातुम् अर्हति  ॥ ८.१५५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/155_adarshayitvA_tatraiva.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Not having brought forward the gold, he should renew the bond; and he should pay as much interest as may be possible.—(155)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अदर्शयित्वा हिरण्यम्**, अदत्वा निर्धनत्वाद् वृद्धिहिरण्यम्,[^३५९] **तत्रैव** पुनः करणं **परिवर्तयेत्** । साक्षिसमक्षम् एवं ब्रूयात् "एतावन् मुलम् अस्मै धारयामि, एतावती च वृद्धिः" इति । पत्रे चारोपयेत्[^३६०] । यावती संभवेद् वृद्धिर्[^३६१] इति तावद् व्याचक्षते । पुनः करणे वृद्धिसहितमूलीभूते लघीयसी वृद्धिः कर्तव्या, यावत्या वृद्ध्या नातिपीड्यते । या प्राग् आसीत् ततो न्यूनेत्य् अर्थः । 


[^३६१]:
     M G: yāvat saṃvatsarā vṛddhir; J: yāvat saṃvatsarāt vṛddhir


[^३६०]:
     M G: yatraivāropayet; J: tatraivāropayet


[^३५९]:
     J: ahiraṇyam (but Jha's translation presupposes vṛddhi- here).

यज्वासहायनारदानां[^३६२] तु मते काकिणीमात्रम् अपि शक्तः करणपरिवृत्तिकाले दापयितव्यः । येन साक्षिणः न श्रवणमात्रे[^३६३] साक्षित्वम्, ददाति[^३६४] तत्समक्षम् अधमर्णो ऽर्थसंबन्धो ऽपि प्रत्यक्षीभवति[^३६५] । यतः श्रवणात् स्रवणे[^३६६] च कृता भविष्यन्ति, तातश् चित्ते[^३६७] तिष्ठति धनं[^३६८] दशवर्षोपेक्षितम् इत्यादि विनश्वरं भविष्यति ॥ ८.१५५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Not having brought forward*’—paid up—‘*the gold*,’—*i.e*., the amount
of gold due as interest,—‘*he should renew the bond*’;—*i.e*., in the
presence of witnesses he should make the declaration—‘I owe this man so
much principal and so much interest,’—and should put this down in
writing also; entering the amount of interest for one year;—so explain
some people.

And in the new bond, when the principal along with accrued interest has
been entered as the principal, the rate of interest stipulated should he
very low; just such as may not become too much of a burden for the man;
that is, it should be lower than the former rate.

Yajvan, Asahāya and Nārada hold that at the time of the renewal of the
bond the debtor should be made to pay even a shell, if he is able to do
so; so that the witnesses may not be witnesses to a mere verbal
statement, but to the actual payment of even a small amount as interest;
so that they actually see the money-transaction; and when they come to
be examined,—which may be any time during ten years,—they may have their
mind firm, on account of being able to recall what they had heard and
also actually seen with their eyes.—(155)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 73), which adds the
following notes:—‘*adarśayitvā hiraṇyam*’, not bringing up the gold for
payment,—not even a single pice,—and hence not paying even the interest,
he should add the accrued interest to the original principal, and making
this total the new principal, he should enter it in the new bond that he
should write. Though the entire interest is actually due to be paid at
the time, yet, if he is unable to pay the whole, he may pay just that
much of it which he may be able to pay;—this is what is meant by the
clause ‘*yāvatī sambhavet etc*.’

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 194), which adds the
following explanation:—‘*Hiraṇyam adarśayitvā*’,—not having paid the
interest that has been earned,—he should have it included in that same
bond;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (80a), which explains ‘*hiraṇyam adarśayitvā*’
as ‘not paying any part of the accrued interest to the Creditor,’ the
meaning is that he should pay as much of the accrued interest as hew
can, and then make out a fresh document;—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 104a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.154-155)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.154].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अशक्तस्य काकिणिम् अपि दातुं सह वृद्ध्या पुनः क्रिया ॥ ८.१५४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

155	If he cannot pay the money (due as interest), he may insert it in the renewed (agreement); he must pay as much interest as may be due.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/156_chakravRddhiM_samArUDho.md">
<details open><summary><h3>156 चक्रवृद्धिं समारूढो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

चक्रवृद्धिं समारूढो  
देश-काल-व्यवस्थितः ।  
अतिक्रामन् देश-कालौ  
न तत्-फलम् अवाप्नुयात्  ॥ ८.१५६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/156_chakravRddhiM_samArUDho.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When a man has entered into a ‘wheel-contract’ wtth reference to a particular place or time,—if he fails in regard to the place or time, he shall not suffer its reward.—(156)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"वाराणसीं यास्यामि त्वदीया युग्या[^३६९] मे भाण्डं च नेतुर्[^३७०] एषा च ते वृद्धिः" इति । तत्र यदि कान्तारनदीसंतरणराष्ट्रोपप्लवादिना[^३७१] तं देशं न गतस् ततो ऽर्वाग् देशात् कियता लाभेन प्रवृत्त्या व्यावृत्तस् तदा यथानिरूपिता वृद्दिहिर् न दाप्यते । यतस् तं देशं यावद् वहतां या वृद्धिर् अप्राप्तानां[^३७२] सा कथं स्यात् । दीर्घम् अध्वानं वहतां युग्यानां महान् क्लेशः स्वामिनश् च तावन्तं कालं कृतैव वृद्धिर् युग्योपकारः । शीघ्रं तु प्रतिनिवृत्तानां स्वामिनः पुनर् अन्यत्रोपकारणं संपद्यत एव । एष एवातिक्रमः । 


[^३७२]:
     M G: aprāptā tāṃ


[^३७१]:
     M G J: -saṃtaraṇaṃ rāṣṭro-


[^३७०]:
     M G J: hetur


[^३६९]:
     M G J: tadīyaṃ puṇyaṃ

- एवं कालातिक्रमः- "मासम् मे वहन्तु[^३७३] बलीवर्दा इयती तव वृद्धिः" इति । तत्र यदि पक्षात् प्रत्येति, तत्र **चक्रवृद्धिम्** अधमर्णः **समारूढः** प्रतिपन्नो ऽङ्गीकृतवान् इति यावत् । तस्यां वृद्धौ **देशकालौ व्यवस्थितौ** यत् तया पूर्वोक्तेन प्रकारेण देशविशेषं कालविशेषं वा आस्थितवान्,[^३७४] न निर्विशेषणम् एव कृतवान्, स एवंविधो ऽधमर्णस् तौ देशकालौ अतिक्रमन्[^३७५] **न प्राप्नुयात् तत्फलं** वृद्ध्याख्यं नाप्नुयान् न भजेत न दद्याद् इत्य् अर्थः ॥ ८.१५६ ॥


[^३७५]:
     M G: atikramo


[^३७४]:
     M G J omit: āsthitavān


[^३७३]:
     M G: māsam eva hantuṃ

_किं तत्र नैवास्ति वृद्धिर् अथ वा पञ्चकं शतम् । नेत्य् आह ।_
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘I am going to Benares,—my purpose being the acquiring of merit as well
as trading in vessels; and such and such an amount shall be the interest
paid upon the wheeled conveyance you supply’;—this contract having been
entered into, if the man does not actually proceed to Benares, being
forced back with only a little profit, by difficulties in the form of
forests, river-crossings and anarchism,—then he should not be made to
pay the entire amount of interest stipulated; for how can the reward
that would be due to those who have gone to Benares be due to those who
never went to that place? When the oxen go a long distance, it involves
much labour on their part; so that it is right that the reward of their
owner should he commensurate with that labour; but when they have
returned sooner than stipulated, it is open to the owner to make further
profit on them by hiring them out afresh.

This is what is meant by ‘failure’ in the text.

Similarly as regards *time* also, the contract being—‘These oxen may
work for me for a month, and your interest shall be so much,’—if the man
returns the bullocks in a fortnight (the man does not have to pay the
full reward).

In both these cases, the debtor has ‘*entered into the
wheel-ccntract*’—*i.e*., accepted its terms—and in this contract a
special place or time has been stipulated,—if then, on account of
reasons described above, he has not kept up to the stipulated place or
time, and has thus ‘failed’ in regard to them,—‘*he shall not
suffer*’—have to pay—‘*the reward*,’ in the form of the stipulated
interest.—(156)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Cakarvṛddhi*’;—‘Interest on wheeled carriage’ (Medhātithi,
Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘compound interest’ (Nārāyaṇa as
also ‘others’ in Medhātithi on verse 157).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 73), which gives a totally
different explanation:—‘*Deśakālavyavosthitaḥ cakravṛddhim samārūḍhaḥ*’
means ‘having entered into an agreement regarding *cakravṛddhi*’ to the
effect that “at such and such a place and time I shall take döuble this
amount,”—if the creditor asks for repayment of his dues with compound
interest, before the stipulated time, or at a place other than the
stipulated one, then he shall not receive his dues with compound
interest;’—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (80a), which explains ‘*samārūḍha*’ as
‘stipulated, agreed upon,’ and ‘*tatphalam*’ as *the effect of the
cakravṛddhi*;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 104a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.156-157)  
**

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 64).—‘For 100 *Paṇas*, the proper interest is ¼
*Paṇa*; 5 *Paṇas* for traders; 10 *Paṇas* for dealers in forests; 20
*Paṇas* for dealers on the seas.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2-38).—‘Dealers in forests should pay 10 per cent., and
dealers on the seas, 20 per cent.; or men may pay to all castes whatever
interest may have been agreed upon by themselves.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उत्तमर्णो ऽधर्मर्णाद् देशकालातिक्रमेण स्वदोषाद् एव । इदानीं कारिता विऋद्धिविषयो ऽयम् अपर उच्यते ॥ ८.१५५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

156	He who has made a contract to carry goods by a wheeled carriage for money and has agreed to a certain place or time, shall not reap that reward, if he does not keep to the place and the time (stipulated).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/157_samudrayAnakushalA_desha-kAlArthadarshinaH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>157 समुद्रयानकुशला देश-कालार्थदर्शिनः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

समुद्रयानकुशला  
देश-कालार्थदर्शिनः ।  
स्थापयन्ति तु यां वृद्धिं  
सा तत्राऽधिगमं प्रति  ॥ ८.१५७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/157_samudrayAnakushalA_desha-kAlArthadarshinaH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

As regards the exact amount to be paid, the interest shall be that which is fixed by persons expert in sea-voyages, and those capable of calculating the profits in connection with a particular place and time.—(157)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**समुद्रयान**ग्रहणं यात्रोपलक्षणार्थम् । स्थलपथिका[^३७६] वारिपथिकाश् च वणिजो **यां वृद्धिं स्थापयन्ति सा तत्राधिगमनं प्रति** निश्चयं प्रति । सैव निश्चेतव्येत्य् अर्थः । **देशकालार्थदर्शिनो** ऽस्मिन् प्रदेश इयान् अर्थलाभो ऽस्मिन् इयान् इति ये पश्यन्ति जानते, न तु समुद्रयान एव च ये **कुशलाः** कर्णधारादयः ।


[^३७६]:
     M G: sthūlapathikā

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये पूर्वश्लोकम् एवं व्याचक्षते यदृच्छाध्याहारेण । अधमर्णेन या देशकालं चाश्रिता तां च प्राप्य तद्देशोदितं फलं लाभाख्यं तस्माद्[^३७७] देशाद् यदि नाप्नुयात्, तदा कीदृशी तत्र वृद्धिर् इत्य् आकाङ्क्षायाम् उत्तरश्लोकः । चक्रवृद्धिग्रहणं कारिताया अपि प्रदर्शनार्थम् । 


[^३७७]:
     M G DK (1: 319): anyasmād

लोभातिशयभाजां वणिजां क्षयव्ययायसंविधिज्ञाः[^३७८] परस्परस्य यां वृद्धिं स्थापयेयुस् तां राजा प्रमाणीकुर्यात् । **तत्राधिगमं प्रतीति** । प्रतिः कर्मप्रवचनीयो ऽधिगमस्य लक्षणत्वात् "लक्षणेत्थंभूताख्याने" (पाण् १.४.९०) तद्युक्ते च द्वितीया ॥ ८.१५७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The present verso is an answer to the question—“In the case cited above,
is there to be paid no interest at all? Or is it to be 5 *per cent*?”

‘*Sea-voyage*’ has been mentioned only by way of illustration; the sense
is that whatever interest is fixed by traders who know all about journey
by land and water, should be determined as the exact amount to be paid.

‘*Those capable of calculating the profits in connection with a
particular place and time*,’—persons who know what amount of profit is
to be made whore,—and not only those, pilots and others, who are *expert
in sea-voyages*.

Others have explained the foregoing verses in the following manner,
making gratuitous additions to its words:—The last verse (157) is in
answer to the question.—“In a case where the debtor has entered into a
contract on the strength of profits to be made at a particular place or
time,—but on reaching that place, he does not make the profit that he
had expected,—then what amount of interest should he pay?” And the
mention of the term ‘*cakravṛddhi*’ (which, in this interpretation would
not mean ‘wheel-interest,’ but ‘compound interest,’ which the debtor
agrees to pay, on expectation of large profits) would include the
‘privately stipulated’ interest also. In such a case, the king shall
decide as due that amount of interest which may be fixed by those
tradesmen who know each other’s circumstances and the chances of profit
and loss.

‘*As regards the exact amount to be paid*,’ ‘*adhigamam
prati*,’—‘*Prati*’ is a proposition denoting ‘indication,’ and as such
governs the Accusative in ‘*adhigamam*,’ according to Pāṇini 1.4.90.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 11), which adds that the
term ‘*Samudrayānakuśalāḥ*’ stands for *all
merchants*;—‘*deśakālārthadarśinaḥ*,’ those who know that in such and
such a country such and such profit is to be made;—‘*adhigama*’ is
‘decision’ *i.e*., ‘by that is the interest to be determined;’—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (68a), which has the following
notes:—‘*Samudrayānakuśalāḥ*’ stands for tradesmen in
general,—‘*deśakālārthadarśinaḥ*,’ one who knows what profit is obtained
at what time,—‘*adhigama*’ is *decision*, *finding*.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.156-157)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.156].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

तत्र ते वणिजो यां वृद्धिं स्थापयेयुः, सा प्रतीयेत, ये हि तत्र क्षयव्ययाध्वलाभद्रव्यसारज्ञाः । ऋणसंबन्धेन, अयम् अपरः प्रतिभुवो धर्मः शिष्यते ॥ ८.१५६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

157	Whatever rate men fix, who are expert in sea-voyages and able to calculate (the profit) according to the place, the time, and the objects (carried), that (has legal force) in such cases with respect to the payment (to be made).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/158_yo_yasya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>158 यो यस्य ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यो यस्य प्रतिभूस् तिष्ठेद्  
दर्शनायेह मानवः ।  
अदर्शयन् स तं तस्य  
प्रयच्छेत् स्वधनाद् ऋणम् [मेधातिथिपाठः - तस्य यतेत]  ॥ ८.१५८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/158_yo_yasya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When a man stands surety for the appearance of a person, if he does not produce him, he shall pay his debt out of his own property.—(158)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

ऋणप्रयोगे द्विविधो[^३७९] विश्रम्भः प्रतिभूर् आधिर् वा । तत्र प्रतिभूपक्ष इदम् उच्यते । त्रिविधश् च प्रतिभूः दर्शने प्रत्यये दाने च । तत्र दर्शनप्रतिभुवम् अधिकृत्येदम् आह । **यस्य दर्शनाय प्रतिभूस् तिष्ठेद्** अमुष्मिन् प्रदेशे मयैष तव दर्शनीयः, स तथा कुर्वन् **स्वधानात् तस्य ऋणं यतेत** प्रयत्नं कुर्याद् दातुम् इति शेषः । दद्याद् इति यावत् । **ऋण**ग्रहणं व्यवहारवस्तुमात्रोपलक्षणार्थम् । तेन यावन्तो ऽर्थविषया व्यवहारे ऽनुक्राम्यन्ते,[^३८०] तद्[^३८१] वस्तु दद्याद् दर्शनेनान्यतरेणाभियुक्तः । वाक्पारुष्यसंग्रहणादौ पणपरिभाषा कर्तव्या । यदि न दर्शितं चेत् तन्मया[^३८२] दातव्यम् । अकृतायां तु परिभाषायां राजदण्डम् एव दाप्यः । शरीरे तु निग्रहे तन्निष्क्रयणं[^३८३] सुवर्णम् ॥ ८.१५८ ॥


[^३८३]:
     M G J: nigrahāntaṃ vikrayaṇaṃ


[^३८२]:
     M G: tanmayāṃ


[^३८१]:
     J: tat tad


[^३८०]:
     M G DK (1: 662): bhūtvānukampayante (MG: -kapayante)


[^३७९]:
     M G: dvividhe
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the case of Loan-transactions there are two kinds of security—a
Surety and a Pledge. The present verse deals with the case where the
security is in the form of a surety.

There are three kinds of Surety—(1) for appearance, (2) for guarantee
and (3) for payment. The present text refers to the surety for
appearance.

‘*If a* *man stands surety* *for* *the appearance* *of a*
*person*—saying ‘I shall produce him at such and such a place’—if he
fails to do so, he shall pay the debt out of his own property.

The term ‘*debt*’ stands for all objects of dispute. The meaning
therefore is that in suits relating to any object, the surety should
have to make good that object. In the case of defamation, assault,
adultery and other offences, if the surety has given the undertaking
that ‘if I do not produce the accused I shall pay such and such a sum,’
then he shall have to pay that sum; but in the event of there being no
such undertaking, he should he made to pay only the fine that the king
imposes upon the accused...... (?)—(158)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 185).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (6.41).—‘Sureties are ordained for appearance, for honesty and
for payment; the first two kinds of surety must pay the debt on failure
of their engagements; as for the last, their sons also may be made to
pay.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.53).—‘Surety has been ordained for appearance, for
honesty and for payment; the first two should he made to repay the debt
on the failure of their engagements; as for the last, his sons also may
be made to pay.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.244-248).—‘Having noticed that the defendant brought up
by the Bailiff has other engagements, the King should take a suitable
surety for his appearance. “I shall pay what is not paid by this man,—I
shall present him before you,—I shall make him deliver a pledge,—You
have no fear from him;—I shall do what he fails to do;—such and such are
his occupations;—he does not swear falsely.”’

*Nārada* (1.118-119).—‘For appearance, for payment, and for honesty;
these are the three different purposes for which three sorts of sureties
have been ordained by the sages. If the debtors fail to discharge the
debt, or if they prove dishonest, the surety *for payment* and *for
honesty* must pay the debt; and so must the *surety for appearance*, if
he fails to produce the debtor.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.39-42).—‘For appearance, for honesty, for payment, and
for delivering the assets of the debtor—it is for these four different
purposes that sureties have been ordained by the sages in the legal
system. The first of these says, “I shall produce the man”; the second
says, “He is a respectable person”; the third says, “I shall pay the
debt”; the fourth says, “I shall deliver his assets.” If the debtors
fail in their engagements, the first two sureties must pay the sum lent
at the appointed time; both the last two sureties, and in default of
them, their sons, are liable for the debt, when the debtors break their
promise. The creditor should allow time for the surety to search for the
debtor who has absconded,—a fortnight, a month, or a month and a half,
according to the distance of the place where the man may he supposed to
he hiding.’

*Kātyāyana* (Parāśaramādhava-Vyavahāra, p. 186).—‘For the searching of
the absconding debtor, the surety should be given time, extending up to
a month and a half; if he produces him by that time, he should he
absolved from responsibility. If, even on the lapse of the time, he is
unable to produce him, he should be made to pay the debt.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

निगदव्याख्यात एवायं श्लोकः । इदानीम् अस्य दर्शनप्रतिभुवो ऽधमर्णम् उत्तमर्णस्यादर्शयतः स्वधनाद् ऋणदानप्राप्तौ सत्याम् मृतस्य "रिक्थभाज ऋणं प्रतिकुर्युः" इत्य् अनेन शास्त्रेणार्थतश् च तत्पुत्रदानं प्राप्तं सत् प्रतिषिध्यते ॥ ८.१५७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

158	The man who becomes a surety in this (world) for the appearance of a (debtor), and produces him not, shall pay the debt out of his own property.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/159_prAtibhAvyaM_vRthAdAnam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>159 प्रातिभाव्यं वृथादानम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

प्रातिभाव्यं वृथादानम्  
आक्षिकं सौरिकां च यत् ।  
दण्ड-शुल्कावशेषं च  
न पुत्रो दातुम् अर्हति  ॥ ८.१५९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/159_prAtibhAvyaM_vRthAdAnam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But the son shall not be liable to pay the surety-money, or a futile gift, or gambling deists, or debts due to liquor, or the balance of fines and duties.—(159)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

प्रतिभुवः कर्म **प्रातिभाव्यम्** । प्रतिभुवा यत् कर्तव्यं परर्णसंशोदनादि तत् **प्रातिभाव्यम्** । अर्हत्ता[^३८४] योग्यता । सानेन प्रतिषिध्यते । तस्यां च प्रतिषिद्धायाम् अधिकारप्रतिषेधः[^३८५] । अनधिकृतश् च न ददातीत्य् एवं न दातव्यम् इत्य् उक्तं भवति । सर्वत्रार्हतौ क्रियापदे व्याख्यायाते[^३८६] द्रष्टव्ये[^३८७] । 


[^३८७]:
     DK: vyākhyeyam eva draṣṭavyā


[^३८६]:
     M G: vyākhyāyante


[^३८५]:
     M G: adhikāraḥ pratiṣedhaḥ


[^३८४]:
     DK (1: 663): arhatā

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कथं पुनः पुत्रस्य प्रातिभाव्यादिप्राप्तिस् तर्हि, तदृणस्य पित्रागृहीतत्वात् ।

<u>नैष दोषः</u> । यद् येन दातव्यतयाङ्गीकृतं तद् गृहीततुल्यफलत्वाद् गृहीतम् एव । तन्निश्चितस्वरूपत्वम् आपन्नाः, अतः प्रतिषिध्यन्ते ।  
**वृथादानं** परिहासादिनिमित्तं प्रतिश्रवणम्- "कुरु कार्यम् इदं मम,[^३८८] परिनिष्पन्ने[^३८९] इदं दास्यामि" इति निष्पादिते कार्ये पित्रादत्ते[^३९०] प्रतिश्रुते कथंचित् पुत्रो न दाप्यते । एवं पारितोषिकादि बन्दिपरिहासादिविषयम् । यद् वाहम्[^३९१] अमुष्माद् वणिज एतस्येद्यद् दापये[^३९२] इति, तत्र तु मनुष्ये प्रेषिते कथंचिद् दातुम् अघटिते ऽसंनिधानाद् वणिजो ऽन्यतो ऽपि कारणाद् दत्तान्तरे पितरि मृते, पुत्रो न दाप्यते । 



[^३९२]:
     M G: dāpayed


[^३९१]:
     M G J: yaṃ cāham


[^३९०]:
     M G: pitrādattaṃ


[^३८९]:
     M G: niṣpannam (omit pari-)


[^३८८]:
     J omits: mama

- अक्षिनिमित्तम् **आक्षिकम्**, सभिकाय यद् धार्यते ऽन्यतो वा यत् प्रयोजनं[^३९३] तद् गृहीतम् इति शक्यते ज्ञतुम् । तस्य प्रतिषेधः । यः परित्यक्तबान्धवो ऽक्षमालास्व् एव शय्यासनविहारी प्रसिद्धः क्रीडनकस् तदृणम् **आक्षिकम्** इति शक्यते निश्चेतुम् । 


[^३९३]:
     DK: prayojayet

सुरापाननिमित्तं **सौरिकम्** । सुराग्रहणं मद्योपलक्षणार्थम् । तेन यः पानशौण्डो ऽत्यन्तमद्यपस् तदृणप्रतिषेधः ।   

**दण्डशुल्कयोर् अवशेषः** । यत्र पित्रा दण्डांशः शुल्कांशश्[^३९४] च कश्चिद् दत्तः परिपूर्णौ दण्डशुल्कौ न दत्तौ, तादृशस्य प्रतिषेधः । 



[^३९४]:
     M G: daṇḍaśaḥ śulkaśaś

यत्र तु न किंचित् पित्रा दत्तं[^३९५] तद् दाप्यते । स्मृत्यन्तरे ऽप्य् अविशेषेणोक्तम्- "प्रातिभाव्यवणिक्शुल्कमद्यद्यूतदण्डाः पुत्रान् नाध्याभवेयुः"[^३९६] (ग्ध् १२.४१) इति । तत्र विकल्पः । महत्य् अपराधे महति च धने पैत्रिके ऽवशेषस्य प्रतिषेधः । शुल्के ऽप्य् एवम् । स्वल्पे तु सर्वस्य ॥ ८.१५९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Prātibhāvyam*’ *is that which* *is* *due from the surety*,—*i.e*., the
paying off of the debt due by the party for whom he has stood surety; it
is this that is called ‘*surety-money*.’

What is denied here is the son’s *liability*; and the denial of
liability implies the denial of its being his duty to pay; and in as
much as a man never pays what it is not his duty to pay, the meaning of
the text is that *he should not pay*. The sense of (the root ‘*arh*’ is
to be thus explained in accordance with the sense of the infinitive verb
with which it occurs.

“But how could there be any idea of the son’s liability to pay the
surety-money, etc., when these were not *debts* incurred by his father?”

There is no force in this objection. When a man has undertaken to pay a
certain sum it is as good as a ‘debt,’ since the result is the same. And
when definitely known, it is a ‘debt,’ and as such may he considered as
being due to be paid by the son. That is why this liability has got to
be denied.

‘*Futile gift*’;—Gift promised in joke or under similar circumstances,
made in some such form as ‘I request you to have this man paid such and
such an amount by such and such a banker.’ If a messenger has been sent
with this message, but the payment is not actually made, either on
account of the banker’s absence, or of some other reason,—and the father
dies in the meantime,—the son cannot be made to pay the gift.

Debts incurred in gambling are ‘*gambling debts*’; *i.e*., the amount
that has been actually lost at play, or the money that can he proved to
have been borrowed for the purpose of gambling, shall not he paid. In
the case of a person who abandons his family and relations and lives and
sleeps constantly at gambling dens, and is known to be always
playing,—it can he easily ascertained that his debts are all due to
gambling.

Debts due to drinking are said to be, ‘*due to liquor*’; ‘*liquor*’
standing for all sorts of intoxicating drugs. Hence the present denial
partains to the debts of a man who is an inveterate drunkard.

‘*Balance of fines and duties*’;—if the father has paid a part of the
fine or part of the duty,—but did not pay the entire amounts,—then the
balance cannot be realised from the son. That is, he cannot be made to
pay what the father did not pay.

Another *Smṛti text* lays it down in general terms—‘the son shall not be
made to pay surety-money, trade-duties, debts due to gambling and
drinking, and lines.’ ( *Gautama*, 12.41.)

Thus then, there is an option. If the crime for which the fine had been
inflicted was a serious one, or the property inherited from the father
is a large one, then the *balance* only of the fine, as of the duties,
shall be remitted; but if they have not. been serious, then the whole
shall be remitted.—(159)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vṛthādānam*’—‘Gifts promised in jest, or to clowns, bards and such
persons’ (Medhātithi, Nārāyaṇa and Kulluka).—‘gifts promised not for
religious purpose, but to singers and the like’ (Nandana).—

“Vaśiṣṭha (16.31) gives this verse as a well-known quotation. So Gautama
(12.41).”—Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 57), which adds the
following notes:—The term ‘*prātibhāvyam*’ refers here to sureties of
both kinds—surety for *appearance*, and surety for
*trust*;—‘*vṛthādānam*’ is *useless gifts*;—‘*ākṣikam*,’ that due to
gambling;—‘*saurikam*’, that due to wine-drinking;—the ‘gambling’ and
‘drinking’ meant here are of the *improper* kind;—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (76b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.159-162)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.31).—‘They quote the following:—“A son need not pay money
due by a surety, anything idly promised, money due for losses at play or
for spirituous liquor, nor what remains unpaid of a fine or a toll.”’

*Gautama* (12.41).—‘Money due by a surety, a commercial debt, a
marriage-fee, debts contracted for spirituous liquor or in gambling, and
a fine shall not involve the sons.’

*Viṣṇu* (6.41).—‘Surety is ordained for appearance, for honesty, and for
payment; the first two themselves (not their sons) shall pay the debt on
failure of the engagement; but of the last, the sons also would be
liable to pay.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2-47, 53, 54).—‘The son shall not pay his father’s debt
involved in connection with wine, or love or gambling, or with balances
of line and toll, or with idle gifts...... Surety is ordained for
appearance, for honesty and for payment; on failure of the engagement,
the first two shall pay the debt, and in the case of the last, his sons
also shall be liable to pay. In a case where the surety for appearance
or the surety for honesty has died, his son shall not he made to pay the
debt; but in the case of one for payment, the sons should pay.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.39-42).—(See under 158.)

Do. (11.51).—‘Sons shall not he made to pay a debt incurred by their
father for spirituous liquor, for losses at play, for idle gifts, for
promises made under the influence of love or wrath, or for suretyship;
nor the balance of a fine or toll.’

*Nārada* (1.118-19).—(See under 158.)

Do. (1.10).—‘The son must pay the debt contracted by the father,
excepting those debts which have been contracted from love or anger, or
for spirituous liquor, games or bailments.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 656).—‘The son shall pay the sum due by reason of
suretyship.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., p. 656).—‘The debt contracted by the father in
connection with suretyship must be paid by the son.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.55, 56).—‘If there are several sureties, each shall pay
to the creditor his own proportionate share of the debt. If each one of
them has stood surety for the whole amount, the creditor may realise it
from them in any way he chooses. In a case where the surety has been
publicly compelled to pay the creditor, the debtor should pay to the
surety double of the amount paid by him.’

*Nārada* (1. 120, 121).—‘When there is a plurality of sureties, they
shall pay each proportionately, according to agreement. If they were
hound severally, the payment shall be made by any of them, as the
creditor pleases. Twice as much as the surety, harassed by the creditor,
has given to the creditor, shall the debtor pay hack to the surety.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.44).—‘When a surety, being harassed, pays a proved debt
which he has vouched for, the debtor shall pay him twice as much, after
the lapse of a month and a half.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 657).—(Same as Bṛhaspati.)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एतेषु पुत्रस्यासंबन्धः शास्त्रसामर्थ्याद् विज्ञेयः । शुल्कावशेषम् इति वचनात् कृत्स्ने शुल्के ऽस्ति पुत्रस्य संबन्धः । दण्डावशेषस्याप्य् एनं विधिम् इच्छन्ति केचित् । प्रातिभाव्यसंबन्धेन च समानविधित्वात् वृथादानादिषु पित्र्येषु न पुत्राः संबध्यन्ते । इदानीं द्विप्रकारस्य प्रतिभुवो न **पुत्रो दातुम् अर्हती**त्य् एतस्मिन् प्राप्त इदम् आरभ्यते — ॥ ८.१५८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

159	But money due by a surety, or idly promised, or lost at play, or due for spirituous liquor, or what remains unpaid of a fine and a tax or duty, the son (of the party owing it) shall not be obliged to pay.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/160_darshanaprAtibhAvye_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>160 दर्शनप्रातिभाव्ये तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

दर्शनप्रातिभाव्ये तु  
विधिः स्यात् पूर्वचोदितः ।  
दानप्रतिभुवि प्रेते  
दायादान् अपि दापयेत्  ॥ ८.१६० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/160_darshanaprAtibhAvye_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The law laid down in the preceding verse shall apply to the case of ‘Surety for appearance’; in the case of the death of the ‘Surety for payment’ however, the king shall make the heirs also to pay up.—(160)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**पूर्व**श्लोके यो **विधिर्** मया **चोदित** उक्तः, यथा पुत्राणां न भवति पैत्रिकं प्रातिभाव्यम्, तद् **दर्शनप्रातिभाव्ये** । यद्य् एवं प्रत्ययप्रतिभुवः पुत्रा दाप्यन्ताम्, अत आह **दानप्रतिभुवि प्रेते दायादाः** पुत्रा **दाप्यन्ते**, नान्यस्मिन् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;यद्य् एवं प्रथमो ऽर्धश्लोको ऽनर्थकः । दानप्रतिभुवः पुत्राणां साधन उक्ते[^३९७] सामर्थ्याद् अन्यस्य[^३९८] प्रतिभुवो नास्ति पुत्राणां संबन्ध इति गम्यते । अथ विस्पष्टार्थम् उच्यते । प्रत्ययग्रहणम् अपि कर्तव्यम् । इतरथा प्रतिषेधे[^३९९] दर्शनग्रहणाद्[^४००] विधौ च दानग्रहणाद् उभयपरिभ्रष्टस्य किं विधिर् उत प्रतिषेध[^४०१] इति संशयः स्यात् । 


[^४०१]:
     M G: vidhibhūtapratiṣedha


[^४००]:
     M G: darśanaṃ grahaṇād


[^३९९]:
     M G: pratiṣedha-


[^३९८]:
     M G: yasya


[^३९७]:
     M G DK: sādhanānukte

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;नास्ति संशयः, स्मृत्यन्तरे स्पष्टम् उक्तत्वात्-

- दर्शनप्रतिभूर् यत्र मृतः प्रात्ययिको ऽपि वा ।

- न तत्पुत्रा ऋणं दद्युर् दद्युर् दानाय ये स्थिताः ॥ इति । (य्ध् २.५६)

इहापि **दानप्रतिभुवी**त्य् अस्य विधित्वाद् अन्यत्राप्राप्तिः । **दर्शन**ग्रहणम् उपलक्षणार्थम् । अनुवादे चोपलक्षणत्वम् अदोषः । किंप्रयोजनम् इति चेत्, विचित्रा श्लोकानां कृतिर् मानवी ॥ ८.१६० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ‘*law laid down*’—by me—‘in *the preceding verse*,’—*viz*., ‘the
surety-money due from the father shall not be payable by the
son’—applies only to the case of ‘*surety for appearance*.’

This assertion might give rise to the idea that the son should be made
to pay in the case of ‘surety for guarantee,’—hence the author proceeds
to add—‘In the case of the *death of the surety for payment*,’ the heirs
are made to pay up, and not in the case of any other kind of surety.

“If such is the meaning, then the first half of the verse is
superfluous; for when it is declared that the son is liable only for the
dues by the *Surety for Payment*, it follows that he is not liable for
the dues by any other form of surety. If it be argued that it is for the
purpose of making things clear that the first, half is added,—then the
case of ‘surety for guarantee’ also should have been added, otherwise,
it would be doubtful whether the denial (contained in the preceding
verse), excluded as it would be from the two cases of surety, is a
prohibition or a positive injunction.”

There can be no such doubt; since the matter has been clearly stated in
another Smṛti—‘In a case where the surety for appearance, or the surety
for confidence, has died, the sons should not pay the dues, but they
should pay in the case of the Surety for Payment,’ (Yājñavalkya,
*Vyavahāra*, 54). In the present text also, as the assertion ‘*in the
case of the death of Surety for Payment*, etc.,’ is in the form of a
positive injunction, it cannot become applicable to the case of any
other form of surety. There is nothing wrong however in the implications
of merely re-iterative assertions (as the first half of the verse is)
being extended (to cases other than those directly mentioned). If the
question is raised, as to the purpose for which such re-iteration should
have been made,—our answer is that it is a peculiarity of Manu’s style
of writing.—(160)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The first half of this verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 57),
which adds that ‘*darśanaprātibhāvya*’ includes the surety for *trust*
also \[this is clear from Yājñavalkya, 254, where both are put on the
same footing\]—the second half is quoted on p. 43 where ‘*dānapratibhū*’
is explained as ‘the surety who had promised *I* *shall pay*,’—and
‘*dāyādān*’ as ‘sons.’

\(1\) ‘*Darśana-pratibhū*’ is the person standing surety with the
promise ‘I shall produce this man when required’;—(2) *Pratyayapratibhū*
is one who says ‘give him the loan on my trust’;—(3) *Dānapratibhū*’—who
says ‘give him the loan, which, if he does not pay, I shall pay.’

The verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (74a and 76b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.159-162)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.159].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवं च सति दानप्रतिभुवः पुत्रस्यास्ति संबन्धः ॥ ८.१५९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

160	This just mentioned rule shall apply to the case of a surety for appearance (only); if a surety for payment should die, the (judge) may compel even his heirs to discharge the debt.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/161_adAtari_punar.md">
<details open><summary><h3>161 अदातरि पुनर् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अदातरि पुनर् दाता  
विज्ञातप्रकृताव् ऋणम् ।  
पश्चात् प्रतिभुवि प्रेते  
परीप्सेत् केन हेतुना  ॥ ८.१६१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/161_adAtari_punar.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

“By what means then would the creditor seek to obtain his dues, in the event of the death of the surety other than that for ‘payment,’ whose character is fully known?”—(161)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अनेन श्लोकेन संदिहानः प्रश्नं कृत्वोत्तरेण निश्चाययति । संदेहहेतुः[^४०२] पदद्वयेन "**अदातरि**," "**विज्ञातप्रकृतौ**" इति । सप्तम्यन्तानि समानाधिकरणानि पदानि व्याख्यायन्ते- **अदातरि, प्रतिभुवि, प्रतिज्ञातप्रकृतौ** च[^४०३] । **ऋणम्** अनुत्तमर्णः **केन हेतुना** **परीप्सेत** लब्धुम् इच्छेत्, किं केवलेनैवात्मव्यापारेण ततः प्रतिभुवः पुत्रम् अपि व्यापारयति । 


[^४०३]:
     M G: na; J omits: ca


[^४०२]:
     M G DK (1: 664): saṃdehahetuślokaḥ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कुतः संदेहः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;उक्तम् "**प्रेते दानप्रतिभुवि**" इति ततो ऽन्यस्मिन् मृते[^४०४] कस् तत्पुत्राणां संबन्धः । यतस् तु खलु **विज्ञातप्रकृतिर्** विज्ञातकारणः प्रतिभूत्वेन धनं गृहीत्वा स्थित इत्य् एतन् निश्चितम्, अतो भवति बुद्धिर् अस्ति तत्पुत्राणां संबन्धो यतस् तेन ऋणसंशुद्ध्यर्थम् अस्य निसृष्टम् इति । 


[^४०४]:
     M G DK: uktam | mṛto dānapratibhūtajjātas tādṛśe mṛte

**पुनः**शब्दः पूर्वस्माद् विशेषम् आह । यति दानप्रतिभुवः पुत्राः संबध्यन्ते । यस् तर्ह्य् अदाता तस्मिन् मृते । **दाता** उत्तमर्णः । **पश्चात्** तत उत्तरकालम् इत्य् अर्थः । शेषं व्याख्यातम् । **परीप्सा** प्राप्तीछा ॥ ८.१६१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Having raised a question by means of the present verse, the Author
answers it in the next verse: and the grounds for doubt are expressed by
means of the two words ‘*other than that for payment*’ and ‘*whose
character is fully known*’;—the three words with the locative
ending—‘*adātari*,’ ‘*pratibhuvi*’ and ‘*vijñātaprakṛtau*’ being
construed together.

‘*By what means would the Creditor seek to obtain his dues*?’—Should he
seek to obtain it entirely by his own operations? Or should he also urge
the surety’s son?

“Why should there be any such doubt, when it has been distinctly
asserted that in the case of the death of sureties other than that for
payment, the sous shall not be liable?—what connection then can the sons
have with such dues?” The doubt arises because the surety is one ‘*whose
character is fully known*’; which means that it is fully known that the
man had received payment for becoming ‘surety ’; and this fact, being
known, might give rise to the idea that his sons should be liable; since
it is possible that the amount paid to the surety was for the purpose of
paying off the debt in question.

The particle ‘*punaḥ*,’ ‘*then*,’ serves to distinguish the present from
the preceding verse; the meaning being—‘if the liability falls upon the
sons of the surety for payment only, then in the case of the death of
one who is surety *not for payment*, from whom would the creditor, after
his death, seek to obtain his dues?’

The rest has been already explained.

‘*Parīpsā*’ is *seeking to obtain*.—(101)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 43), which takes it as
putting the question which is answered in the next verse. It adds the
following notes:—‘*Adā tari*’, *i.e*., a surety other than the one for
payment (*i.e*., the surety for appearance and the surety for
trust),—being ‘*vijñātoprakṛti*’—*i*.*e*., being known to have stood
surety after having received something in pledge from the debtor; and
thus having its character fully known;—if such a surety dies ,—‘*kena
hetunā*’—by what means—is the ‘*dātā*’—the man who advanced the loan,
the creditor,—to receive back the debt? The work goes on to quote
Halāyudha as explaining the term ‘*vijñatoprakṛti*’as ‘being known that
he became the *lagnaka* (?) on receiving a *pledge*’, and regarding the
verse as denying the creditor’s right to receive payment from the
surety’s heirs on his death. But remarks that the net result of both
explanations is the same.

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (74a), which has the following
notes:—‘*Adātari*’, a surety other than *Dānapratibhū*,—‘*dātā*’, the
creditor,—‘*vijñātoprakṛti*’, one whose solvency is well known.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.159-162)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.159].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

समानविभक्तीनि पदान्य् एकार्थतया व्याख्येयानि । **अदातरि प्रतिभुवि प्रेते विज्ञातप्रकृतौ** विज्ञातं कारणं लग्नकत्वे यस्य, सो ऽयं विज्ञातप्रकृतिः । किं पुनस् तत्संबन्धकार्पणम् । एवं च धनावष्टम्भेनायम् अस्याधमर्णस्य, यस्मान् न किंभूतः । तत इत्तंभूते ऽस्मिन् **प्रतिभुवि प्रेते** पश्चाद् **दाता** प्रयुक्तम् ऋणं **परीप्सेत् केन हेतुना** संदिह्य पृच्छति । कथं च संदिह्यते यतः तत्कारणम् उच्यते । येन तावद् दानप्रतिभुवः पुत्रस्यास्ति संबन्ध इत्य् उक्तम्, न दर्शनप्रतिभुवः । अतः सत्य् अपितृरिक्थसंबन्धे शास्त्रसामर्थ्यान् न युक्तो दापयितुम्, यतश् च गृहीतधने [प्रतिभुवि] प्रेते दर्शनलग्नकपुत्रो ऽपि सन् दापयितुम् इति एवम् उभयथा दर्शनात् संदेहे सतीदम् आह — ॥ ८.१६० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

161	On what account then is it that after the death of a surety other than for payment, whose affairs are fully known, the creditor may (in some cases) afterwards demand the debt (of the heirs)?
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/162_nirAdiShTadhanash_chet.md">
<details open><summary><h3>162 निरादिष्टधनश् चेत् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

निरादिष्टधनश् चेत् तु  
प्रतिभूः स्याद् अलंधनः ।  
स्वधनाद् एव तद् दद्यान्  
निरादिष्ट इति स्थितिः  ॥ ८.१६२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/162_nirAdiShTadhanash_chet.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the surety were one to whom money had been made over and who had enough money,—then he to whom it had been made over shall pay it out ok his own property; such is the settled rule.—(162)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**निरादिष्टं** निसृष्टं स्वधनाद् अर्पितम्- "भव लग्नक इदं ते धनं मत्तस् त्वया संशोधनीयं यद्य् अहं न दद्याम्" । **अलंधनः** पर्याप्तधनः । यावद् धनम् उत्तमर्णाय दातव्यं तावत् परिपूर्णं प्रसृष्टम् । स्वल्पे तु निसृष्टे बहुनि संशोध्ये न दापयितव्यः । पूर्वस्य प्रश्नस्योत्तरम् इदम् । यद्य् अपि न[^४०५] दानप्रतिभूर् अद्य निरादिष्टस् तत् तत्पुत्रो दाप्यते स्वधनाद् एव । तद्वद् यो[^४०६] निरादिष्टपुत्र इति द्रष्टव्यम्, तस्यैव प्रकृतत्वात्, साक्षात् प्रतिभुवस् तु प्रतिभूत्वाद् एव प्राप्तिर् इति चेन् मैवम् । निरादेशनेन[^४०७] इति स्थितिर् एषा शास्त्रमर्यादा । विचाराद् एवावलंबन इति सिद्धे यन् निरादिष्टो ऽलंबन इति चैवम् अभिधानं तत्पद्यग्रन्थानुरोधेन ॥ ८.१६२ ॥


[^४०७]:
     J omits: cen maivam | nirādeśanena


[^४०६]:
     M G: tadyo; J: tad dadyān


[^४०५]:
     J omits: na
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If the surety is one who is ‘*Nirādiṣṭadhanaḥ*,’ a person to whom money
has been handed over by the debtor, with the instruction—‘In the event
of my being unable to pay, you will please clear oil the debt with
this,’—and hence ‘*alandhanaḥ*,’ having ‘*enough money*’;—*i.e*., who
had made over to him money sufficient to pay off the whole amount due to
the creditor-then he should be made to pay. But if the amount made ever
to him was small, while the amount of the debt is large, then he should
not be made to pay.

This verse supplies the answer to the question in the preceding verse.

Though the money had been made over to the surety, yet it is the son who
is to be made to pay out as of his own property (the surety having
died). Hence the words should be construed to mean ‘the son of the
surety to whom money had been made over’; as it is the *son* that forms
the subject-matter of the context; as for the surety himself, his
liability would follow from the mere fact of his being a ‘surety.’

‘*Such is the settled rule*,’—ordinance deduced from the scriptures.

What is intended having been already expressed by the term
‘*alandhanaḥ*,’ ‘who had *enough money*,’— the addition of the term
‘*nirādiṣṭadhanaḥ*,’ ‘*to whom money had been made over*,’ is due to the
fact of the treatise being a metrical one (which admits of superfluous
words and expressions).—(162)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Alandhanaḥ*’—Qualifies the surety (Medhātithi, Govindarāja and
Nārāyaṇa);—it qualifies the surety’s heir (Rāghavānanda);—Nandana reads
‘*alakṣitaḥ*’ and explains it as ‘if the surety who received the money
is not found.’

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 48), as providing the
answer to the question put in the preceding verse. It adds the following
explanation:—If the surety, to whom money had been handed over
(*nirādiṣṭa*) by the debtor, is ‘*alandhanaḥ*’,—*i.e*., he has really
got the money,—then, on his death, the ‘*nirādiṣṭaḥ*’—*i.e*., the *son*
of the surety to whom money had been handed over—should pay the debt out
of his own property. The term ‘*nirādiṣṭaḥ*’ is applied figuratively to
the *son*.

It is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (74a), which has the following
notes:—‘*Nirādiṣṭadhana*’, is the surety to whom enough money had been
handed over by the creditor, to cover the amount of surety
involved,—‘*alandhanaḥ*’, possessed of sufficient property,—the second
‘*nirādiṣṭa*’ stands for the son of the person who had stood surety and
has since died; the meaning being that the son should make good the debt
for which his father had stood surety.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.159-162)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.159].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**निरादिष्टधनो**] प्रतिभूः समर्पितधनः, न वाङ्मात्रेण । **अलंधनश्** च **स्यात्** पर्याप्तधनः । यावता संबध्यते लग्नकत्वेन । अथ वा निरादिष्टधनो वा[ङ्मात्रेन प]श्चाद् अलंधनस् समर्पितधनः पर्याप्तधनश् च भवति, तत्रैतस्माद् धेतोः **स्वधनाद् एव तद्** दातुम् अर्हति । अधमर्णलग्नकपुत्र उत्तमर्णायेति । अयं च दानग्रहणविधिः [सिद्धि]कारणेन ॥ ८.१६१ ॥

_अन्यश् च_ ।
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

162	If the surety had received money (from him for whom he stood bail) and had money enough (to pay), then (the heir of him) who received it, shall pay (the debt) out of his property; that is the settled rule.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/163_mattonmattArtAdhyadhInair_bAlena.md">
<details open><summary><h3>163 मत्तोन्मत्तार्ताध्यधीनैर् बालेन ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

मत्तोन्मत्तार्ताध्यधीनैर्  
बालेन स्थविरेण वा ।  
असंबद्धकृतश् चैव  
व्यावहारो न सिध्यति  ॥ ८.१६३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/163_mattonmattArtAdhyadhInair_bAlena.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A transaction is not valid when effected by one who is drunk, or insane, or distressed, or wholly dependent, or minor, or senile, or unauthorised—(163)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कार्यपर्यायो **व्यवहार**शब्दः । यत् किंचिद् दानाधानविक्रयादिकार्यं लेख्यादि च प्रमाणम्, एतैः कृतं तन् **न सिध्यति** कृतम् अप्य् अकृतं भवति । **मत्तोन्मत्तौ** विख्यातौ । 

**आर्तो** धनबन्धुनाशादिपीडितः प्रत्युपस्थितभयश् च । यौगिकत्वान् मत्तादिशब्दानां यावन् मदादियुक्तास् तावत् तत्प्रमाणाभावबोधको[^४०८] ऽयं प्रतिषेधः । प्रदर्शनार्थं चैतद् अप्रकृतिस्थत्वमात्रस्य । यथोक्त- 


[^४०८]:
     M G DK (1: 552): tatpramāṇam āvasthiko

- कुर्याद् प्रतिकृतिं गतः । 

- तद् अप्य् अकृतम् एवाहुर् अस्वतन्त्रः स हेतुतः[^४०९] ॥ इति ।


[^४०९]:
     M G J: tadā prakṛtam asyāhur asvatantre sahetutaḥ

अप्रकृतिस्थश् चोच्यते उपप्लुतबुद्धिः स्वकार्यविवेचने समर्थः । उक्तं च-

- कामक्रोधाभियुक्तार्तभयव्यसनपीडिताः[^४१०] ।


[^४१०]:
     M G: -ārthā bhayavyasana-

- रागद्वेषपरीताश् च[^४११] ज्ञेयास् त्व् अप्रकृतिं गताः ॥ इति । (न्स्म् १.३७)


[^४११]:
     M G: rāgadveṣaparāś ceti

कामादीनां[^४१२] द्वन्द्वं कृत्वा पीडितशब्देन तैः पीडिता इति साधनंकृतेति तृतीयासमासः । तेन पीडितस्य प्रतिषेधः । स चायं संप्रति मन्मथाधिष्ठितः[^४१३] स्त्रीपरिरम्भणादि परीप्समानो भवति । अभियुक्ता द्यूतादिक्रियान्तरे दत्तावधानाः । एते हि तत्र संसजन्तः स्वामिनो ऽपि स्व इत्य् अस्य प्रातिभाव्यादिक्रियानिश्चयस्यानवधानान् न प्रमाणम् । यतः क्रियान्तरावहिततया परेण पृच्छ्यमाना इदम् अस्मै दीयताम् अङ्गीकृतं वा प्रातिभाव्यम् इयति वस्तुनीदृशे ऽनेन च प्रकारेणोच्यत इत्य् एवमादि निपुणतो नावधारयन्ति । प्रकृतिक्रियाविघ्नो वा मा भूद् अस्मिन्न् इहस्थ इत्य् अभिप्रायम् अभ्युपगच्छन्ति, "गछ्च त्वम्, यद् ब्रवीषि तत् सर्वम् अनुष्ठीयते" इति, पारतन्त्र्यं वाङ्गीकूर्वन्ति । तद् उक्तम् "स्वतन्त्रः स हेतुतः" इति । येन हेतुनास्वतन्त्रो ऽप्रमाणं सो ऽस्य स्वतन्त्रस्यापि हेतुर् विद्यते । यथास्वतन्त्रः स्वम् अपि न विनियुङ्क्ते एवम् अयम् अपि कामादिवशीकृतो ऽर्थविवेकं कार्याणां च गुणदोषौ क्रियमाणाव् अनधिगच्छन्न् अस्वतन्त्रेण तुल्यो भवति । आर्तो व्याख्यातः । अभियुक्तार्तशब्दौ[^४१४] च धर्मिवचनौ लक्षणया धर्मपरौ[^४१५] विज्ञेयौ । अभियोगो ऽभियुक्त आतुरता आर्त इति[^४१६] । व्यसनानि कामक्रोधसमुत्थितानि मृगयादीनि । अभियुक्तो[^४१७] व्यसन्य् अपि कांचित् क्रियां तात्पर्येण कुर्वन्न् उच्यते । अव्यसन्यप्रवृत्तो ऽपि तद्ध्यानरतः[^४१८] । अथ वा कामक्रोधशब्दौ कामिनि क्रोधवति वर्तेते । अत्र च पक्षे भयव्यसनशब्दौ कृतद्वन्द्वौ तृतीयान्तौ पीडितशब्देन संबध्येते । अन्ये तु स्वतन्त्रा एव । रागद्वेषाभ्यां परीता व्याप्ताः । रागः क्वचिद् आत्मीयेष्व् अभिषङ्ग आत्मीयतया परिगृहीतस्य कस्यचित्[^४१९] संबन्धिनापि ध्यायतो वाभिप्रेतसिद्धौ मनसः परितोषो रागः, तद्विपरीतो द्वेषविषयः । परिपथिन्य् अनात्मीयतया परिगृहीते तदस्वास्थ्यतद्विपर्ययात् परितुष्टिवृत्तिर् इत्य् एवमादिरूपौ रागद्वेषौ । सर्वथास्य भावबुद्धिश् चलिता क्षणम् अपि विवक्षिते कार्ये नावतिष्ठते । अन्यद् वदन्न् अन्यद् आचरति[^४२०] । एवंरूपो ऽप्रकृतिस्थः । अन्यथा सर्व एव पुरुषाः कामादियुक्ताः जराजीर्णाक्षिशिरोरोगार्त्तिमन्तो ऽप्रकृतिस्थाः[^४२१] स्युः । न चैवम्[^४२२] । 


[^४२२]:
     M G DK: syur na caivam adhyadhīno . . . (making it one sentence. But the commentary on NSm ends here, and with adhyadhīno, Medhātithi resumes his commentary on Manu's verse).


[^४२१]:
     M G: -mattāḥ prakṛtisthāḥ


[^४२०]:
     M G DK: vadanto 'nyad ācaranti


[^४१९]:
     DK: kvacit; MG: cit (omitting kasya)


[^४१८]:
     M G DK: tadvyākhyānarataḥ


[^४१७]:
     M G J: abhiyukta-


[^४१६]:
     M G J: ātura iti


[^४१५]:
     M G: dharmiparau


[^४१४]:
     M G: abhiyuktaviśabdau


[^४१३]:
     M G: -ādhiṣṭha-; DK: -ādhiṣṭhaḥ


[^४१२]:
     This section is a commentary on NSm 1.37

**अध्यधीनो** गर्भदासः पुत्रशिष्यौ भार्या च । यदापि रूढ्या गर्भदास एवाध्यधीनस् तथाप्य् अस्वतन्त्रोपलक्षणार्थत्वात् सर्व एव ते गृह्यन्ते । स्वधनदानादि स्वामिनम् अनुज्ञाप्य यत् कुर्वन्ति तत् सिध्यति । तथा च नारदः-


- यद् बालः कुरुते कार्यम् अस्वतन्त्रकृतं च यत् ।

- अकृतं तद् इति प्राहुः ॥ (न्स्म् १.३५) इति

- अस्वतन्त्रः स्मृतः शिष्य आचार्ये तु स्वतन्त्रता ।

- अस्वतन्त्राः स्त्रियः पुत्रा दासाद्यश् च परिग्रहः ॥

- स्वतन्त्रस् तु[^४२३] गृही यस्य तस्य तत्[^४२४] स्यात् क्रमागतम् ॥ (न्स्म् १.२९–३०)


[^४२४]:
     DK: yat


[^४२३]:
     DK: tatra tu

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु यदि न स्वातन्त्र्यं स्त्रीणाम् उच्यते, पुंसश् च स्वातन्त्र्यम्, एतद् अनुपपन्नम् । यतः साधारणं धनम् । कथम् एकाकी मनुष्यो भार्ययाननुज्ञातो दानविक्रयादिभ्यः प्रभवेत् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अत्रोक्तम्[^४२५] । 


[^४२५]:
     M G DK: prabhavad ata ity uktam

- स्त्रीकृतान्य् अप्रमाणानि कार्याण्य् आहुर् अनापदि । इति । (न्स्म् १.२२)

तथा "कुले ज्येष्ठः" इत्य् उपक्रम्य, "तत्कृतं स्यात् कृतं कार्यं नास्वतन्त्रकृतम् कृतम्"[^४२६] (न्स्म् १.३८) इति च । धनसाधारण्ये हि पुरुषो ऽपि स्त्रीवद् अस्वतन्त्रः । यच् छब्दे स्वाम्यं पारतन्त्र्यं चेति तद् विरुद्धम् इव, स्वामित्वम् अत्र एता[^४२७] च व्यवस्था इति योज्यं भवति । पारतन्त्र्यं परविधेयता तदिच्छानुवर्तित्वम् । यदि च परतन्त्रः परेच्छाम् अन्तरेण विनियोक्तुं न लभते, कीदृशम् अस्य स्वाम्यम्[^४२८] । अथ दानाधानविक्रये यत्र प्रकृतत्वाद् अनीशाः । स्वशरीरे परिभोगादौ यावदिच्छं स्वधनं[^४२९] विनियोज्यते, परतन्त्रमहाधनानां[^४३०] शास्त्रनिगृहीतात्मनां द्विजानां येनात्मोपभोगो[^४३१] भवेत् । बालस्य स्वाम्यपारतन्त्रे उपपन्ने[^४३२] । यदा प्राप्तव्यवहारस् तदा ईशिष्यते[^४३३] । एवं पुत्रादाव् अपि[^४३४] । स्त्रियास् तु न कदाचिद् अपारतन्त्र्यम् ।


[^४३४]:
     M G: eva putrādāv api; eva putrādayaḥ


[^४३३]:
     M G: tadā śiṣyate; DK: tadeśiṣyante


[^४३२]:
     M G: upapanno


[^४३१]:
     M G: yonātmopabhogo; J: nātmopabhogo


[^४३०]:
     DK: paratantraḥ mahā-


[^४२९]:
     M G: svadharmo; DK: svadharme


[^४२८]:
     M G: anyasvāmyasya


[^४२७]:
     M G J: svāmitvasyety etāś


[^४२६]:
     Editions give diverse and wrong readngs, all omitting the final kṛtam: M D DK: tatkṛtaṃ tasyākṛtaṃ nāsvatantrakṛtam; J: tatkṛtaṃ tatkāryajātaṃ nāsvatantrakṛtam

- बालया वा युवत्या वा वृद्धया वापि योषिता ।

- न स्वतन्त्रेण कर्तव्यं कार्यं किंचिद् इति स्थितिः ॥ (म्ध् ५.१४५)

- स्वाम्यपारतन्त्र्ये स्त्रीणां समावेश[^४३५] उच्यते । न पारतन्त्रवचनेन स्त्रीणां स्वधनविनियोगनिषेधः क्रियते । किं तर्हि, अस्थाने दानाधानविक्रयादि वार्यते । परतन्त्राः, आसां स्थानं निरूपणीयम्, न हि ताः[^४३६] स्वयं विवेक्तुम् अलम् — एष पात्रम् अर्हति भूमिहिरण्यादिप्रतिग्रहम्, अनेन कन्यासंबन्धं कुर्यात्, इदं द्रव्यम् अस्मात् क्रेतुं[^४३७] विक्रेतुं वार्हतीत्य् एवमादितया[^४३८] ज्ञातव्यम् । अतो लेख्यादिकाले भर्त्राद्यनुमतिर् उपयुज्यते । केवला कृते कार्ये "नाहं किंचिज् जानामि,[^४३९] त्वया विप्रलब्धास्मि" इति वचनस्यावसरत्वात् । भर्त्राद्यनुमतौ तु किं वक्ष्यति । तद् उक्तम् ।


[^४३९]:
     M G DK: kiṃcid avijñāte


[^४३८]:
     J divides the words: evamādi tayā


[^४३७]:
     M G: kartuṃ


[^४३६]:
     The readings here is probably corrupt. M G: tair āsāṃ sthāne nirūpaṇīyena hitāḥ; J: tāḥ sthāne nirūpaṇīyena hitāhitaṃ


[^४३५]:
     M G J: strīṇām asamāveśa

- एतान्य् अपि प्रमाणानि भर्ता यद्य् अनुमन्यते ।

- पुत्रः पत्युर् अभावे वा राजा वा पतिपुत्रयोः[^४४०] ॥ (न्स्म् १.२३)


[^४४०]:
     M G J: rājādhipatiputrayoḥ; DK: rājā ca patiputrayoḥ

अस्वातन्त्र्यम्[^४४१] अपि नियमितम् ।


[^४४१]:
     M G DK: atisvātantryam

- अनुशिष्टा विसर्गे च विक्रये चेश्वरा[^४४२] मता । (न्स्म् १.३४)


[^४४२]:
     M G J: visvarā

अपि बुद्धिपूर्वे[^४४३] बालस्खलिते[^४४४] स्वामिना पत्न्यादयो नियोज्या अनुबन्धादिना, न तु[^४४५] स्वाम्यविसर्गे ऽपि ।


[^४४५]:
     M G: nanu; M G DK add: tair


[^४४४]:
     J: bālaśikṣite (the reading of this sentence is very uncertain)


[^४४३]:
     DK: abuddhipūrve

- सा सद्यः संनिरोद्धव्या त्यजेद् वा कुलसंनिधौ । (म्ध् ९.८३)

इति स्त्रीणाम् एव न पुंसः पारतन्त्र्यम्, पतितस्याप्य् आ प्रायश्चित्तसमाप्तेः प्रतीक्षणोपदेशः । अतो न[^४४६] विक्रयो ऽपि दासादीनां गरीयस्याम् आपदि कुत्रचिद् अस्ति । तेषु स्वामिन इत्य् एतद् अपेक्ष्य । भार्याशिष्यदासीनां यथास्वं पारतन्त्र्यं । धनसाधारण्यात् तु न भर्तुर् अनुज्ञां विना[^४४७] भार्याया यागादौ क्वचिद् अधिकार इति स्थितम् । 


[^४४७]:
     M G DK: anujñāpya


[^४४६]:
     M G DK omit: na

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;यच् चेदम्,

- पुत्राणां भर्तरि प्रेते वशे तिष्ठतु[^४४८] सा तथा । (?)


[^४४८]:
     DK: tiṣṭhati

- जीवतोर् अस्वतन्त्रः स्याज् जरयापि समन्वितः । (न्स्म् १.३२)

- तयोर् अपि पिता श्रेयान् अभावे बीजिनो मता[^४४९] ॥ (न्स्म् १.३३)


[^४४९]:
     M G: śreyo na bhāve vījino mataḥ

इति अनेन पुत्राणां पारतन्त्र्यम्, ननु चान्योन्यव्याहृतम् इति ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;नास्ति व्याघातः । अनधिकारिणि पुत्रे बाले मातृपरतन्त्रता । मातुस् तु पुत्रे पारतन्त्र्यम् । मातृधनरक्षणं चोरादिदोषेभ्यः । पुत्रस्यापि यत् पितरि पारतन्त्र्यं तद् अपृथक्कृतस्य[^४५०] तद्गृहे[^४५१] निवसतः[^४५२] । यदा तु पितृविभक्तो[^४५३] धनं स्वयम् अर्जितवांस्[^४५४] तदा 


[^४५४]:
     M G: arpitavāṃs


[^४५३]:
     M G: pitṛvibhakta-


[^४५२]:
     M G : nivaset


[^४५१]:
     M G: tadagrahe


[^४५०]:
     M G: apṛthak | tasya

- ऊर्ध्वं तु षोडशाद् वर्षात् पुत्रं मित्रवद् आचरेत् । 

इति स्वातन्त्र्यम् एव । 

**बालो** ऽप्राप्तव्यवहारः षोडशवर्षात् प्राक् ।   

**स्थविरो** लुप्तस्मृतिः जराभिभूतो ऽतीतव्यवहारः । यद्य् अप्य् अयं कस्यांचिद् वेलायां प्रकृतिस्थो ऽपि भवति तथापि न प्रमाणम् अप्रत्ययात् । यस्य तु भर्तुः स्त्री जनानां कार्यप्रतिबन्धेन वर्तते तयानुज्ञातम् एतद् भवति ।   

**असंबद्धकृतः**[^४५५] । परार्थम् अनियुक्तो यो व्यवहारयति, न भ्राता न पिता, "देवदत्ताय शतं धारयति" इत्येवमादि वक्तुं न लभ्यते । ये तु भ्रातरः समानकार्याः सर्वे च तुल्यव्यवहारिणस् तेषाम् अन्यतरेणापि गोपश्वादिविक्रयो गृहादिबन्धनप्रयोगादि च क्रियमाणं सिध्यति, संबन्धित्वात्[^४५६] ।   

**व्यवहार**शब्दः सर्वव्यवहारग्रहणार्थः । प्रकरणाद् ऋणव्यवहार एव स्यात् ॥ ८.१६३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*vyavahāra*’ is synonymous to ‘*kārya*,’ which stands for all
such transactions as gifts, deposits, sales and so forth, as also the
documents supporting these;—all this is ‘*not valid*’; *i.e*., even
though it has been done, it is as good as undone.

‘*Drunk*’ and ‘*insane*’;—these terms have been already explained
before.

‘*Distressed*,’—suffering the pangs caused by the loss of wealth or
relatives; as also one who apprehends an imminent danger.

‘Drunk’ and the other terms being used in their literal sense, the
situation spoken of here is applicable only so long as the men are
actually under the influence of ‘*drink*’ and other conditions.

What is mentioned here is only by way of illustration; and it stands for
‘any man who is not quite in his senses.’ To this end it has been
declared—‘Business should be done with a man when he is in his senses;
as when he is not under his senses, he is not master of himself, and
this invalidates the transaction.’ A man is said to be ‘not in his
senses’ when his mind is perturbed and he is incapable of understanding
his business. This has been thus described—‘men beset with lust and
anger, or distraction or dangers and vices, as also those under the
influence of love or hatred are said to be ‘*not in their senses*’
(*Nārada*, 1.41). In this text, the first line has to be treated as a
double compound term ‘*kāma*’ to ‘*vyasana*’ for one copulative
compound, and this with the participal adjective ‘*pīḍita*’ forms the
Instrumental Determinative Compound, in accordance with Pāṇini, 2.1.32;
hence the man excluded is one who is actually suffering from the
mentioned distractions. Thus the man who is ‘*beset with lust*’ is
always hankering after the embraces of the woman he loves;—the man who
is preoccupied with gambling or other similar things is said to be
‘beset with distractions.’

Such persons as have been enumerated here,—even though they be real
owners of the property concerned in the transaction,—are not in a
position to grasp the real nature of ‘ownership’ or ‘surety’ or such
other details of a transaction; and as such their action cannot he
regarded as valid. And the reason for this lies in the fact that having
had their minds preoccupied by other things, they cannot clearly grasp
what they are saying, when, on being asked by some one, they may
say—‘give this to such and such a man,’ or that ‘I have promised to be
surety for such an amount, or for such an object,’ and so forth. In fact
they accept anything that the man asks for, being desirous as he is of
getting rid of the man whose presence is an obstacle to what may be
engaging attention at the time—and they say ‘you go, I shall do all that
you say,’ and thus place themselves entirely under the control of
another person. This is what is meant by what has been said above
regarding the man being ‘not master of himself’; and the meaning is that
‘just as the action of the man who is not master of himself is not
valid, so also is the action of one who, though master of himself, is
under the influences mentioned’; and just as the man who is not master
of himself cannot make use of what is his own, so also the man who is
overpowered by lust and other things is unable to understand the details
of the transaction and discriminate between its advantages and
disadvantages; and in this sense he is ‘not master of himself.’

‘*Distressed*’ (in Nārada’s text) has been already explained. Though the
terms *^(‘)abhiyukta*,’ ‘distracted’ and ‘*ārta*’ (distressed) denote
the *qualified person*, yet in the context in which they occur they have
to be taken as standing for the *qualities* of ‘distraction’ and
‘distress’ (these being construed with ‘*pīḍita*,’ ‘*beset with*’
‘*vices*’—arising from lust, anger and other causes, such as hunting and
the like.

Any man who is devoting his entire attention to any matter is said to be
‘beset with distraction or vice’; as also is the person who, though not
actually engaged in any pet vice, is rapt in expounding its virtues.

Or (with a view to retain the literal meaning of the terms ‘*abhiyukta*’
and ‘*ārta*’), the two terms ‘*Kama*’ (‘lust’) and ‘*krodha*’ (‘anger’)
may be taken as standing for the ‘lustful’ and the ‘angry’; and in this
case the participial adjective ‘*pīḍita*,’ ‘beset with,’ would be
compounded with the copulative compound formed of only ‘danger’ and
‘vice’; the other terms of the compound standing by themselves.

‘*Those under the influence of*’—*i.e*., overpowered by—‘*love and
hatred*’;—‘Love’ means *attachment to a person regarded as his own*;
when a man regards another as his own,—even though he be not actually
related to him,—then, whenever he comes to think of him, or whenever
anything good happens to him, he has a feeling of satisfaction; this is
what constitutes ‘love.’ The reverse of this is ‘hatred’; when a man is
regarded as one’s enemy, there is a feeling of satisfaction when
anything wrong happens to him. Such is the nature of ‘love’ and
‘hatred.’

Under everyone of the conditions described, the man’s mind is perturbed,
and unable to be fixed, even for a moment, upon the business in hand.
People under such conditions say pne thing and do another. It is only
when men are in this condition that they are really ‘not in their
senses.’ Otherwise (if the words were taken in their literal sense), in
as much as all men are (more or less) ‘beset with lust, etc., or
‘distressed’ by old age, or some disease of the eyes or of the head,—all
would have to be regarded as ‘not in his senses’; and the ‘wholly
dependent’ Born Slave, the son and the disciple and the wife would not
be so regarded (even though, as ‘not master of themselves,’ these also
have been declared to be persons whose transaction is not valid). Though
literally the *Born Slave* alone is ‘*wholly dependent*,’ yet since this
latter term has been taken to be indicative of ‘those who are not master
of themselves,’ the son, the disciple and the wife all become included
under this same category.

Anything that these persons do, in the shape of making gifts out of
their own property and the like, after having obtained the permission of
their master, is quite valid. Says *Nārada* (1.39.40)—‘The transaction
entered into by a minor, or by one who is not master of himself, is
declared to be as good as undone’; and again,—‘The Disciple is not
master of himself, as it is the teacher in whom the character of the
master rests; wives and sons and all such dependents as the slave and
the like, are also not master of themselves; the master being the
householder himself on whom the property has devolved from bis
ancestors.’ (*Nārada*, 1.33.34.)

“What is said regarding wives not being masters of their property and
husbands alone being the masters, cannot be right; since property being
common to both, how can the husband alone, without the concurrence of
his wife, he entitled to enter into such transactions as gifts, sales
and the like?”

This has been already explained, by the following text of Nārada
(1.26)—‘All that is done by women is invalid, except in times of
distress.’

Further, Nārada (1.42), having mentioned the ‘eldest members of the
family,’ goes on to add that ‘it is only when the transaction of selling
is entered into by him that it is valid’; and what is said here in
regard to ‘selling’ applies to all transactions relating to property in
general. So that, just as in the case of the junior male members of the
family, so in the case of the female members also, ‘dependence’ means
‘absence of control’; and ‘ownership’ would be incompatible with this
‘dependence’; because ‘dependence’ denotes *subjection to the control of
others*, *i.e*., acting up to the wishes of other persons. Thus then, if
the ‘dependent’ person is incapable of making use of any property except
in accordance with the wish of another person, what sort of ‘ownership’
would belong to him or her? It may he argued that ‘ownership’ and
‘dependence’ would be quite compatible, as in the case of the minor,—in
the sense that while he is not fit to enter into any such transactions
as gift, sale or pledge, yet he is at full liberty to spend the property
upon himself; for his own enjoyment he is quite free to make use of it
any way he chooses; while to the other transactions he would be entitled
only after he has reached majority. But even this could not be possible
in the case of women, who are never free from ‘subjection’ or
‘dependence’; as says Manu (5.147).—‘Be she a minor, or a full-grown
woman, or an elderly lady, the woman, by herself, shall not enter into
any transaction; such is the settled law.’ It is for this reason that in
the case of women, ‘ownership’ and ‘subjection’ have been held to be
incompatible.

This ‘subjection’ of women however does not mean that women are not to
make use of their property; all that is meant is that they are not to
make improper use of it, in the shape of indiscriminate gifts or sale.
So that what is meant by saying that ‘women are *dependent* upon others’
is that by themselves they are incapable of judging what would be
beneficial for themselves, or what person deserves a gift of gold or
land, or to whom a daughter should be given in marriage; or from whom a
certain article should be purchased, or to whom something should be sold
and so forth. It is for this reason that at the time that they are
executing a bond or some such deed, it is necessary that they should
obtain the sanction of their husband or some such relative; because if
the business were done by herself alone, it would be open to her to
say—‘I know nothing about this,—I was cheated by you’; if, on the other
hand, the sanction of the husband and the relations has been previously
obtained, what could she say? It is in view of this that it has been
declared—‘Transactions entered into by women also are valid, if they are
sanctioned by the husband, or by the son, in the absence of the husband,
or by the king, in the absence of both husband and son.’

Too much of ‘subjection’ also has been qualified—‘when permitted, she is
fully capable of spending and selling.’ But what is meant by this is
that, she is to be permitted to spend money for the up-bringing of
children and other such matters, but never to alienate the ownership
entirely.

Further, the declaration—‘she shall be confined, or abandoned in
presence of the family’ (Manu, 9.83)—also indicates that there is
‘subjection’ only of *women*, not *of men*; since even in the case of
the outcast, it has been laid down that people should await the
completion of the necessary expiatory rites.

It is in accordance with this view that, even in times of direct
distress, there is to be no selling of *male* slaves.

Thus, so far as ‘subjection’ or ‘dependence’ is concerned, its exact
nature as pertaining to the wife, the son, the disciple and the slave,
is dependent upon the nature of the man’s ownership over each of these.
And as the ownership over the family property rests exclusively in the
master of the house, the wife has no right to perforin even sacrifices
out of that property, except with her husband’s permission.

“We find that there are two declarations—(*a*) ‘on the death of the
husband, the woman continues to live under her sons’; and again (*b*)
‘so long as his parents are alive, the man shall remain subject to them,
even though he may have become old,’—which latter places the son totally
under subjection; so that these two texts are naturally contradictory.”

There is no contradiction: what is said in (*b*) is that ‘the son shall
remain under his mother, *during his minority*’; and the subjection of
the mother to the son \[asserted in (*a*) \] means that he is to guard
his mother’s property against dangers from thieves and others. And what
is meant by the son’s subjection to his father refers to the state in
which the son lives with the father and has not set up a separate
household. When he has set up a separate household and acquired his own
property, then ‘the son shall be treated as a friend, after the age of
sixteen years’; which means that he is entirely master of himself.

The ‘*minor*’ referred to in the text is one who is below sixteen years
of age, and has not entered business.

‘*Senile*’—who has lost his memory and liecome incapable of transacting
business. Though it is possible for such a man to be in his senses at
times, yet his acts cannot be valid, since there can be no certainty
regarding the condition of his mind. When however the old man’s wife is
carefully looking after his affairs, if a certain act has been done with
her sanction, it is to be regarded as valid.

‘*Asambaddhakṛtaḥ*’—‘*effected by one who is unauthorised*.’—If a man
transacts business on behalf of another person, without being authorised
by him,—and he is neither his father nor brother,—it is not open to him
to say—‘this man owes a hundred to Devadatta.’ But when a number of
brothers do business in common, and are equally entitled and capable of
doing it,—if any one of them sells cattle or other property, or pledges
a house or some such property, the transaction is quite valid.

The term ‘*vyavahāra*’ in the present text stands for all kinds of
business, though from the context it would be restricted to
*debt-transactions* only.—(163)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.31, 32).—‘The King shall set aside transactions
effected either forcibly or under pressure; as also those effected by
women, or during night, or within the house, or outside the village, or
by enemies. A transaction is not valid when effected by one who is mad
or drunk or distressed or in trouble, or an infant, or frightened and so
forth,—as also what has been brought up by a person not related to
either party.’

*Nārada* (1.26, 29, 31, 39-41).—‘The sages declare that the transactions
of a woman have no validity; specially, gift, hypothecation, sale of a
house or a field. The transactions of a slave are declared invalid,
unless they have been sanctioned by his master. A youth who, though
independent, has not yet arrived at years of discretion, is not capable
of contracting valid debts. If a boy, or one who possesses no
independence, transacts anything, it is declared an invalid transaction
by persons acquainted with the law. That also which an independent
person does, who has lost control over his actions, is declared an
invalid transaction. Those persons are declared to have lost control
over their actions who are actuated by love or anger, or tormented, or
oppressed by fear or misfortune, or biassed by friendship or hatred’

*Nārada* (Aparārka, p. 638).—‘Any transaction that has been effected by
women, or at night, or outside the village, or inside a house, or at
night, should have to he ratified again.’

*Bṛhaspati* (8.22, 23).—‘A document executed by a mad man, an idiot, an
infant, one who has absconded through fear of the King, a bashful
person, or one tormented by fear,—is not invalidated (by failure to
produce its author).—But as a rule a document executed by a dying
person, or enemy, one oppressed with fear, a suffering person, a woman,
one intoxicated or distressed by a calamity, or at night, by fraud or by
force,—does not hold good.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

धर्मव्यवहारा एव मत्तादिभिः कृता न सिध्यन्ति । न केवलं प्रकरणाद् ऋणव्यवहारः । अमत्तादिभिर् अपि प्रयुज्यमानाः सर्वव्यवहारेषु ॥ ८.१६२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

163	A contract made by a person intoxicated, or insane, or grievously disordered (by disease and so forth), or wholly dependent, by an infant or very aged man, or by an unauthorised (party) is invalid.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/164_satyA_na.md">
<details open><summary><h3>164 सत्या न ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सत्या न भाषा भवति  
यद्य् अपि स्यात् प्रतिष्ठिता ।  
बहिश् चेद् भाष्यते धर्मान्  
नियताद् व्यवहारिकात्  ॥ ८.१६४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/164_satyA_na.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

No contract, even though substantiated, is valid, if what is contracted for is contrary to law or to established custom.—(161)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कस्यचिद् अनुष्ठेयस्यार्थस्य प्रतिपादकः शब्दो **भाषा** सामान्येन भवति । यो ऽर्थस् तया प्रतिपाद्यते, सो ऽनुष्ठेयः । किं सर्वापि भाषा[^४५७] न सत्या । नेत्य् आह । **बहिश् चेद् धर्मात्** — धर्मबाह्यं यद् उच्यते शास्त्राचारविरुद्धम् — पञ्चकाद् अधिका वृद्धिः, भार्यापत्य्विक्रयादिः, अन्वयिनः सर्वस्वदानम् इत्य् एवमादि । **यद्य् अपि स्यात् प्रतिष्ठिता**[^४५८] पत्रलिखिताः प्रतिभुवो वा दत्तास् तथापि न सिध्यति । **व्यावहारिको धर्म** आचारनिरूढः । **नियतो** ऽनादिर् नेदानींतनः । पूर्वशेषं चैतत् । अस्वतन्त्राप्रकृतिस्थैः कृतं दानाद्यनिश्चितम् इति न प्रमाणम् ॥ ८.१६४ ॥


[^४५८]:
     M G: pratiṣṭhitāḥ


[^४५७]:
     M G: sarvā vibhāṣā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Words expressive of something to be done is called ‘*Bhāṣā*,’
‘*contract*’ in general; and what is there laid down should be done.

“Is it meant that no contract is valid?”

No; that only which is ‘*contrary to law*,’—that is regarded as
‘contrary to law,’ ‘illegal,’ which is opposed to practice sanctioned by
the scriptures; *e.g*., interest more than five per cent., the selling
of wives and children, the giving away of one’s entire hereditary
property and so forth.

‘*Even though fully substantiated*,’—*i.e*., reduced to writing, or
pledged by a surety, and so forth;—it is ‘*not valid*’

^(‘)*Custom*’—practice sanctioned by
usage;—‘*established*’—long-standing, not modern.

This verse is supplementary to what has gone in the preceding verse,
regarding the invalidity of gifts and other transactions effected by
dependent persons and by persons not in their senses and so forth.—(164)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (65b), which adds the following
explanation:—An agreement, even though formally put in writing, has no
legal force, if it is contrary to the laws and customs prevalent among
business-men; and such an agreement cannot be enforced,—such agreement,
for instance, as where a man who has children agrees to bequeath all his
property to a stranger.

It is quoted also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 21b and 39b), which has
the following notes—‘*Pratiṣṭhita*’, free from the defect of being
impossible and unknown and so forth,—‘*bhāṣā*’, proposition,
statement,—is not ‘*satya*,’ accepted by the king or the court,—‘that
statement which is contrary to all rules of business, even though it be
established by evidence, oral and documentary, should not be accepted’;
*e.g*., the statement that ‘this man has promised his entire property to
me’,—when the man concerned is one who has got sons and oilier
successors.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (7.11).—‘That instrument is termed *proof* which is not adverse
to peculiar local usages, which detines clearly the nature of the pledge
given, and is free, from confusion in the arrangement of t he
subject-matter and in the succession of the syllables.’

*Nārada* (1.136).—‘That, document is said to be valid which is not
adverse, to the custom of the country, the contents of which answer to
the rules regarding pledges and other kinds of security and which is
consistent in import and language.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

धर्मविरुद्धश् च व्यवहारो ऽपत्यभार्याविक्रयादिर् न सिध्यति । येनासौ [धर्मं] वारयति । वृद्धिः सा प्रयोगकाले द्विगुणीभूतापि पुनर् वर्धत एव प्रतिमासम्- एवं ग्रामपुञ्जग्रहणादिवृद्धयो ऽपि प्रतिषिद्धा बोद्धव्याः । ऋणसंबन्धाद् इदम् अपरं तद्गतम् एवोच्यते ॥ ८.१६३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

164	That agreement which has been made contrary to the law or to the settled usage (of the virtuous), can have no legal force, though it be established (by proofs).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/165_yogAdhamanavikrItaM_yogadAnapratigraham.md">
<details open><summary><h3>165 योगाधमनविक्रीतं योगदानप्रतिग्रहम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

योगाधमनविक्रीतं  
योगदानप्रतिग्रहम् ।  
यत्र वाप्य् उपधिं पश्येत्  
तत् सर्वं विनिवर्तयेत्  ॥ ८.१६५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/165_yogAdhamanavikrItaM_yogadAnapratigraham.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Fraudulent mortgages and sales, fraudelent gifts and acceptances, as also all wherein he detects fraud—he shall nullify.—(165)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**योगः** छद्म । तेन यद्[^४५९] **आधमनं**[^४६०] बन्धकार्पणं कृतम्[^४६१] एतच् च ज्ञायते असत्यकार्यं[^४६२] कृतम् इति[^४६३] । **तद्** राजा **विनिवर्तयेत्** । कश्चिद् धनिकेनोपरुध्यमान आह "न मे किंचिद् अस्ति" इति[^४६४] । "ननु क्षेत्रं स्थण्डिलं वासो ऽस्ति तद्[^४६५] अर्पय" इत्य् अनया शङ्कया गुह्यं स्वजनाय[^४६६] कस्मैचिद् असाव् आधानीकरोति । तत आह "तद् अन्यस्य मया बन्धकीकृतम्" इति । एतच् च ज्ञायते । सत्य् अपि प्रकाशलेख्ये तस्य आधातृतायोगात् । यदि हि परमार्थतयाधित्वेन कृतं कथम् आधातैव[^४६७] भुङ्क्त इति । एवंविधं योगाधमनम्[^४६८] अप्रमाणीकृत्य धनिने क्षेत्रादि दापयितव्यो ऽधर्मर्णः । यस्य चान्येनागमेन स्वाम्यं धनदानकाल आगमान्तरेण करणं करोति तद् अपि योगाधमनम्[^४६९] । तत्राधर्मर्णो यस्य वानेनागमेन स्वाम्यं कल्पितः[^४७०] सत्यम् आगमं कारयितव्यः । 


[^४७०]:
     M G DK: daṇḍitaḥ


[^४६९]:
     M G DK: yogāvāpanam


[^४६८]:
     M G DK: yogāvāpanam


[^४६७]:
     M G: ādhānaiva


[^४६६]:
     M G J: suhṛtsvajanāya


[^४६५]:
     M G DK: kṣetre sthaṇḍile vā dattam iti tad


[^४६४]:
     DK omits: me; M G: na kiṃcid astīti me


[^४६३]:
     M G J omit: iti


[^४६२]:
     M G J: asatyakāryeṇa


[^४६१]:
     M G J add: iti


[^४६०]:
     M G DK omit: ādhamanaṃ; J: dhamanaṃ (although it wrong division: yadādhamanaṃ, read as yadā dhamanaṃ)


[^४५९]:
     M G J: yadā

एवं **विक्रयादि** ।[^४७१] यो ऽल्पेन मूल्येन महार्घम् अर्थं[^४७२] विक्रीणीते, यो वा नैव मूल्यं क्रेतुर् आदत्ते, यच् चाह-[^४७३] "ते इह[^४७४] विक्रीतं मया तवेदम्" इति, स उत्तरकालम् "विक्रीतं त्वया ममेदम्[^४७५]" इति "गृहाण मूल्यम्" इति[^४७६] न लभते वक्तुम् । न चायं विक्रयानुशयो दशाहात् परेणापि निवर्तयेद् इति । यो वाप्तेन क्राययति पूर्वोक्ते निमित्ते[^४७७] सति निमित्तान्तरे वा सति विक्रीणीते न च रूपकादिभिः क्रयो ऽपहर्तव्यव्यवहारे[^४७८] दृश्यते न च रूपकादिसंचयशील इत्यादिना योगविक्रयाधिगमः ।   

**योगदानप्रतिग्रहम्** । यद्[^४७९] उभवस्वामिकम् अन्यतरेण[^४८०] प्रतिग्रहीत्रा सह संविदं कृत्वा दीयते,[^४८१] एवमादि **योगदानप्रतिग्रहम्** । दानं च प्रतिग्रहश् चेति विगृह्य द्वन्द्वैकव्यवहारः ।[^४८२] यद्य् अपि दानप्रतिग्रहक्रिययोर् अन्यतरोपादानेनैवेतराक्षेपः — न्यथास्वरूपासिद्धेः — तथापि क्रियाद्वयोपदानं वृत्तपूरणार्थम् । अथ वैकक्रियोपादाने तत्कारिण एव दण्डः स्यात्, न द्वितीयस्य, सत्य् अपि तत्साधनत्वे शब्देनानुपादानात् । अतो दातुः प्रतिग्रहीतुर् द्वयोर् दण्डार्थं भेदेनोपादानम् । 



[^४८२]:
     M G add: na


[^४८१]:
     J: dāpyate


[^४८०]:
     M G: anyatare; J: anyataraḥ


[^४७९]:
     The passage yad ubhayasvāmikam . . . dvandvaikavyavahāraḥ is placed after daṇḍaḥ syāt in J, and after yatra vāpy upadhiṃ paśyed iti in  M G.

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;तथा सति **योगाधमनविक्रीतम्** इत्य् अत्रापि क्रयादिद्वितीयक्रियोपादानं कर्तव्यम् । 

<u>न कर्तव्यम्</u>[^४८३] ।स्मृत्यन्तराद् वा सामान्यशास्त्राद् वानुपादाने दण्डः स्यात् ।  
**यत्र वाप्य् उपधिं पश्येद्** इति । **उपधिः** छद्म । अनेनैव[^४८४] अन्यत्राप्य् एताभ्यः क्रियाभ्यः उपधिर् निवर्त्यः । यथा कश्चिद् धनिनोक्तः- "यावद्[^४८५] इयद्भिर् अहोभिर् दातव्यम् इति प्रतिभुवं न स्थापयसि, तावत् त्वां न त्यक्ष्यामि" इति । तस्मिंस् तूष्णीभूते कश्चिद् उत्तमर्णेन सह संविदं करोति "माम् अस्य[^४८६] प्रतिभुवं गृहाण यावद् एनम् उपपीडयामि बह्व् अनेन ममापक्र्तम् अहम् अस्य पीडार्थ एव प्रतिभूर् न मया किंचिद् दातव्यम्" इति, तत्रोत्तमर्णः प्रकाशम् आह "यद्य् अन्यस् ते प्रतिभूर् नास्ति, कर्मादिकं न प्रार्थयसे, नूनं जिहीर्षितं ते धनम्" । स पीडितः प्रत्याह "नैतेन सह ममेदृशो व्यवहारः प्रवृत्तपूर्व्ः" इति । प्रतिभूः पुनर् आह "भवानि तवाहं प्रतिभूः" । सो ऽनिछन् पीडोपरोधाद् आह "यथेच्छसि तथा कुरु" । नास्य पूर्वक्रियास्व् अन्तर्भावः । 



[^४८६]:
     M G: māsasya


[^४८५]:
     M G: dhaninottvoyāvad


[^४८४]:
     M G: chadmanaiva; DK: evam

- एवं कृषिवाणिज्यशिल्पारम्भादिक्रियाः एतद्व्यतिरेकिण्यः प्रतिदर्शनीयाः । उदाहरणमात्रं दानाधमनविक्रयाः । 

तद् एतद् योगकृतं कार्यं यावत् किंचन **तत् सर्वं** राजा **निवर्तयेत्** । राजा कृतम् अप्य् अकृतम् आदिशेन् न प्रमाणीकुर्यात् । कर्तारं कारयितारं च दण्डयेत् ॥ ८.१६५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Fraud*’ is *deceit*; when a certain thing has been mortgaged
fraudulently,—*i.e*., when it is found that it has been done in an
improper manner,—then the king shall ‘*nullify it*’. A debtor, on being
pressed by the creditor, may say ‘I have nothing’;—on which the latter
may say, ‘you have a cultivated field, a barren plot, a house, give me
these.’ In view of the possibility of this demand, the debtor mortgages
his property beforehand, to a friend or relative, so that when the
demand is actually made, he says—‘all this is already mortgaged.’ In
this case, even though the mortgage-bond may be there, it is easily
perceived that there is no real mortgagee in the case; for if there were
a real mortgagee, how could it he possible for the property to be still
enjoyed by the alleged mortgager? In such a case, having found the
mortgage to be fraudulent, the king should nullify it and make the
debtor surrender to the creditor all his cultivated field and other
property.

Similarly in a case whore the man has acquired a property in one form,
but transferred it to another in another form,—this also is a
‘fraudulent transaction’; and in this case, when the fraud has been
detected, the debtor should be made to execute another transfer-deed in
the right form.

So also in the case of sales and other transactions. When a person sells
a high-priced article, but does not receive its price from the buyer,
but has declared to him ‘I have sold this, it is yours,’—then after
sometime, it is not open to him to say ‘I have not sold it, it is mine.’
In fact any rescission of sale cannot be permitted after the lapse of
ten days; nor when the sale has been effected by a trustworthy person.
That a certain selling-transaction has been fraudulent is to be
ascertained, when it is found that either on account of some defect in
the article sold, or some other cause, the article sold does not serve
the purposes that it was alleged to be able to servo, or is found
incapable of being treasured as a valuable thing (?).

‘*Fraudulent gift and acceptance*’;—though the act of *giving* involves
that of accepting also, and hence the one would have implied the
other,—neither being possible without the other,—yet the text has
mentioned both, for the purpose of filling up the metre. Or such mention
was necessary, as otherwise, if only one act were mentioned, the
resultant penalty would fall upon the doer of that act only, and not on
that of the other, on the ground of this latter not having been directly
mentioned. Hence, in order to indicate that the penalty should be
inflicted upon the giver and the receiver both, both the acts have had
to be mentioned.

“In that case, on the same grounds, in the case of the acts of
‘*fraudulent mortgage and sale*’ also, the other party to the
transaction,—the doer of the act of buying for instance—should have been
mentioned.”

It is not absolutely necessary to do so; since the requisite information
is supplied by other *Smṛti-texts*; and since all the Smṛti-texts treat
of a common subject, they can always be taken as one conglomerate whole.

*E.g*., when a thing is owned by two persons, if one of them, after
having made a compact with the *receiver*, makes the other partner make
the gift to him,—this is a ease of ‘*fraudulent gift and acceptance*.’
The compound ‘*dānapratigraham*’ is treated as singular, because
‘*dāna*’ and ‘*pratigraha*’ together form a copulative compound.

‘*All wherein he detects fraud*.’—‘*Fraud*’ means *deceit*. Even apart
from the acts that have been specified, there are various kinds of
fraudulent transactions. For instance, on being pressed by his creditor,
a debtor approaches a wealthy person with the appeal—‘until yon agree to
stand surety for me, I shall not leave you’;—whereupon the wealthy man
makes a secret compact with the creditor—‘accept mo as the man’s surety,
and during all this time I shall go on tormenting him, he has done me
much wrong, I am standing surety for him only for the purpose of
tormenting him, and I shall not be liable to pay anything on his
account’;—thereupon the creditor says openly to the debtor,—‘If you
cannot produce a man who will stand surety for you, nor do you propose
to liquidate the debt by manual labour or such other means, then your
property must be forfeited’;—being thus pressed he approaches the
aforesaid wealthy person, who however says—‘I have never before had any
business-transaction with him’; but he later on says again, ‘all right,
I shall be your surety’; and the debtor also, in view of the trouble in
store for him, accepts it.

What is said here should be taken as applying to all such transactions
as relate to trades and crafts and so forth It is only by way of
illustration that the acts of ‘gift, mortgage, and sale’ have been
specially mentioned. The meaning thus is that whatever transaction the
king finds out to be fraudulent, ‘*he* *shall nullify*’; even though it
has been effected, he shall declare it to be *not-affected*, cancelled,
shall not regard it as valid,—and he shall also punish both parties to
the transaction.—(165)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 162), which
explains ‘*Yoga*’ as ‘obtain another’s property, without any right to
it, by means of begging and such other means’,—‘*ādhamana*’ as
‘pledge’;—and the compound ‘*Yogādhamanam*’ as ‘*Yoge ādhamanam*’,
‘pledging of what does not rightly belong to one.’

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 90), which explains ‘*Yoga*’ as
‘fraud’; and adds that the king shall nullify every transaction in
connection with which he detects some fraud;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (65b)
which explains ‘*upadhī*’ as *fraud*,—‘*yogā*’ as ‘deceit’;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 39b), which has the following
notes:—‘*Ādhamana*’ is pledge,—‘*yoga*’ is deceit,—‘*upādhi*’ is
fraud;—and adds that all fraudulent transactions are null and void.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (7.7).—‘A fraudulent document makes no evidence.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.89).—‘A document written in one's own hand, even when
not attested by witnesses, is to be accepted as evidence, except when it
has been obtained by force or fraud.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 686).—‘A document becomes nullified by the
defect of witnesses, or of the scribe, as also by reason of fraud on the
part of the creditor.’

*Yama* (Parāśaramādhava-Vyavahara, p. 162).—‘What is given under force,
or enjoyed forcibly, or made to be written forcibly,—all transcations
effected under force, Manu has declared to be fit for being nullified.’

*Nārada* (1.137).—‘A document is invalid which has been executed by a
person intoxicated, by one charged with a crime, by a woman, or by a
child, or that which has been caused to be written by forcible means, by
intimidation, or by deception.’

*Bṛhaspati* (8.21, 23).—‘Forgery may be found out by internal evidence
and legitimate titles...... A document executed by fraud, or by force,
does not. hold good.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**योगाधमनं** नाम लोकयात्रायां यन् न स्फुटम् उच्यते । "त्वं तावत् अनेन कार्यं कुरु, अहं पुनर् अनेन कार्यं करिष्यामि" इति । विक्रयो ऽप्य् एवंलक्षणः । **योगदानं** च यद् यात्रोत्सवव्यपदेशेन सोपधं दीयते ऽधमर्णादिभिर् उत्तमर्णप्रभृतीनाम् । अमुमूर्षुश् चानपत्यो ज्ञातिभ्यो बिभ्यन् नैराश्याद् ददाति, एवमादिना योगेन । दानप्र[ति]ग्रहयोर् विशेषः- दानं मैत्र्या प्रतिग्रहो धर्मेण । **यत्र चाप्य् उपधिं पश्येद्** दानप्रतिग्रहगतम् अन्यगतं वा **तत् सर्वं विनिवर्तयेत्**, राजा व्यावहारान् पश्यन् अनयत्र वा । ऋणसंबन्धाच् चेदम् अन्यम् अपरं तद्गतम् एवोच्यते ॥ ८.१६४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

165	A fraudulent mortgage or sale, a fraudulent gift or acceptance, and (any transaction) where he detects fraud, the (judge) shall declare null and void.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/166_grahItA_yadi.md">
<details open><summary><h3>166 ग्रहीता यदि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ग्रहीता यदि नष्टः स्यात्  
कुटुम्बार्थे कृतो व्ययः [मेधातिथिपाठः - कुटुम्बे च] ।  
दातव्यं बान्धवैस् तत् स्यात्  
प्रविभक्तैर् अपि स्वतः  ॥ ८.१६६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/166_grahItA_yadi.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When the borrower is lost, and the expenditure was incurred by the family, the debt is to be paid by the relatives out of their own property, even though these may have been separated.—(166)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तं येन गृहीतम् ऋणं तेन प्रतिदातव्यम् । तदभावे पुत्रपौत्रैस् तदभावे तदृक्थग्राहिणा[^४८८] । न तद्व्यतिरेकेनान्यस्य[^४८९] दानं प्राप्तम् इष्यते । अत्रे क्वचिद् विषये तदर्थम् इदम् उच्यते । येन गृहीतं धनं स चेन् **नष्टो** मृतो देशान्तरं गतो वा — **कुटुम्बे**[^४९०]** च कृतो व्ययः** — **दातव्यं बान्ध्वैस् तद्** भ्रातृतत्पुत्रपितृव्यादिभिः **प्रविभक्तैर्** विभक्तधनैर् अपि **स्वतः** स्वध्नाद् इत्य् अर्थः । यावद् भ्रातरः सह वसन्ति तेषां यद् ऋणम् उपजातं तद् गृहमध्याद् एव दीयते । तच्छिष्टे[^४९१] ऽस्य विभागः । यथोक्तम् ।


[^४९१]:
     M G: tadṛṣṭe; DK: tadṛkthe


[^४९०]:
     M G: kuṭumbena


[^४८९]:
     M G: tattadvyati- (omits na)


[^४८८]:
     M G DK: tadṛkthahārī

- पितृव्येणाविभक्तेन भ्रात्रा वा यद् ऋणं कृतम् ।

- मात्रा वा यत् कुटुम्बार्थं दद्युस् तत् सर्वम् ऋक्थतः[^४९२] ॥ इति ।


[^४९२]:
     M G: ṛkṣita; DK: ṛkthinaḥ

अविभक्तानाम् अन्यतमेन यत् कुटुम्बार्थम् ऋणं कृतं तद् भ्रातृपितृव्यतत्पुत्रादयः सर्वे दद्युर् न त्व् अकुटुम्बार्थम् इत्य् अर्थः । अविभक्तग्रहणात् तेषाम् एव तथाविधम् ऋणं संभवेत् प्रायः । न हि प्रविभक्ताः[^४९३] परकीयकुटुम्बभरणार्थम्[^४९४] ऋणं गृह्णन्तो दृश्यन्ते । अतः[^४९५] **प्रविभक्तैर् अपीत्य्** आह ¦ **अपि**शब्दाद् अविभक्तैश् च । यदि कश्चिद् भ्रातॄणां विभक्तानां स्वकुटुम्बभरणम् अकृत्वा प्रवसेद् इतरश् च महासत्वतया तदीयं कुटुम्भं बिभृयात्, तत्र विभकेनापि भ्रात्रा पितृव्येण वा यद् ऋणं कृतं तद् इतरो दद्याद् एव देशान्तरागतः ॥ ८.१६६ ॥


[^४९५]:
     M G DK omit: ataḥ


[^४९४]:
     M G: -karaṇārtham


[^४९३]:
     M G: pravibhaktāt
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been declared that the debt is to be repaid by the man by whom it
was contracted, and in his absence by his son or grandson, and in the
absence of those hitter, by any one who inherits his property; and from
this it would seem that no one else was liable in any circumstances. It
is in view of this that the author adds the present verse.

If the man who contracted the debt is ‘*lost*’—*i.e*., dead or gone
abroad, ‘*and the* *expenditure was incurred by the family*,’—then that
debt ‘*is to be paid by bis relatives*’; *i.e*., by his brother or
nephew or uncle, *etc*.,—‘*even though these may have been
separated*’—*i.e*., had divided their property;—‘*svataḥ*,’ *i.e., out
of their own property*.

The debt that has been contracted by one among several brothers 1ms to
be repaid out of the common household, specially if there has been no
division among them. To this end we have the declaration -¹ The debt
that has been contracted by an unseparated uncle or brother, or by the
mother, for the sake of the family, all this is to be paid out of the
common property, so that from among the undivided members of a family,
if any one has contracted a debt for the sake of the family, it should
be paid by all other members,—brother, uncle, nephew or cousin; but not
so, if the debt contracted was not for the use of the family.’ The term
‘unseparated’ implies that debt for the use of the whole family is
generally contracted only by such persons; for people who have become
separated are never found to be contracting debts for the maintenance of
families other than their own.

‘*Even though these may hare been separated*’;—the term ‘even’ implies
that it has to be paid of course by those who are *not separated*. If it
so happens that from among separated brothers, one goes abroad, without
making any provision for his family, and another, being of a magnanimous
temperament, takes upon himself the burden of maintaining his family
during his absence—then the absentee should, on his return, repay any
debts that his separated brother or uncle may have contracted on behalf
of his family.—(166)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 53), which adds the term
‘*svataḥ*’, which means ‘out of their own property’, and implies that in
a case where even among divided co-sharers, if one has contracted a debt
for the purpose of the maintenance of all co-sharers, and he, for some
reason or other, such as death and so forth, is unable to repay it—then
the debt should be paid by all the other co-sharers.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 647);—in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 178),
which explains ‘*svātaḥ*’ as ‘from his own property;’—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (76a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 110a), which
says that the explanation given by the ‘Vṛttikāra’ is that ‘when a man
who borrowed the money goes away or dies, and the money was spent by him
for his family, then the debt is to be repaid *even* by such of his
collaterals as may have been living separately from him’,—what to say,
regarding those who might have been living with him. It demurs to this
explanation and quotes the explanation of the ‘Mahābhāṣya’ as that
separated collaterals, like the uncle and so forth, should repay the
debt out of their own property.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.166-167)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.45, 46).—‘Any debt that may have been contracted for
the benefit of the family, on the death or during the absence of the
master of the house, by such members as have not become divided, shall
be paid by all those who inherit the property. But the woman shall not
pay the debt contracted by her husband or son; nor the father, the debt
contracted by the son,—except when the debt is one that has been
contracted for the benefit of the family.’

*Nārada* (1, 2, 3, 10-18).—‘The father being dead, it is incumbent on
the sons to pay his debt, each according to his share, if they are
divided; if they are not divided, the debt must be discharged by that
son who becomes the manager of the family-estate. That debt which has
been contracted by an undivided paternal uncle, brother, or mother, for
the benefit of the household, must be discharged wholly by the heirs. A
father may not pay the debt of his son; but the son must pay the debt
contracted by his father; excepting those that may have been contracted
from love or anger, or for spirituous liquor, games or bailments. Such
debts of a son as have been contracted by him by his father's orders, or
for the maintenance of the family, or in a precarious situation,—must be
paid by the father. What has been spent for the household by a pupil,
apprentice, slave, woman, menial, or agent, must he paid by the head of
the household. When the debtor is dead, and the expense has been
incurred for the benefit of the family, the debt must he paid by his
relations,—even though they he separated from him in interests. The
father, uncle, or eldest brother, having gone abroad, the son (or nephew
or younger brother) is not bound to pay his debt before the lapse of
twenty years. Every single coparcener is liable for debts contracted by
another coparcener, if they were contracted while the coparceners wore
all alive and undivided. But after their death, the son of one is not
hound to pay the debt of another. The wife need not pay the debt
contracted by her husband, nor one contracted by her son, except if it
had been promised by her, or contracted in common with her husband. A
sonless widow, and one enjoined by her dying husband (to pay his debt),
must pay it. Or it may be paid by one who inherits the estate—liability
for debts going with the right of succession. A debt contracted by the
wife shall never hind the husband, unless it had been contracted at a
time when the husband was in distress. Household expenses are
indispensably necessary.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11. 49-52). The father’s debt, on being proved, must he
paid by the sons as if it were their own; the grand-father’s debts must
be paid by his son’s sons, without interest; but the son of the grandson
need not pay it. When a debt has been incurred for the benefit of the
household, by an uncle, brother, son, wife, slave, pupil or dependant,
it must be paid by the head of the family. Sons shall not be made to pay
a debt incurred by their father for wine, for losses at play, for idle
gifts, for promises made under the influence of love or hate, or for
suretyship; nor the balance of a lino or toll. The liability for debts
devolves on the successor to the estate, when the son is involved in
calamity.’

*Viṣṇu* (6.27-39).—‘If he who contracted the debt should die, or become
a renunciate, or remain abroad for twenty years,—that debt shall be
discharged by his sons or grandsons;—but not by remoter descendants
against their will. He who takes the assets of a man, leaving or not
leaving male issue, must pay the sum due by him; and so mush he who has
the care of the widow left by one who had no assets. A woman shall not
be compelled to pay the debt of her husband or son; nor the husband or
the son, the debt of his wife or mother; nor the father, that of his
son. A debt contracted by parceners shall be paid by any one of them
that may be alive; and so shall the debt of the father be paid by any
one of the brothers, before partition; but after partition, they shall
pay severally, according to their shares of the inheritance. A debt
contracted by the wife of a herdsman, wine-distiller, public-dancer,
washer or hunter shall be discharged by the husband.... The house-holder
must pay that debt which may have been contracted by any person, for the
behoof of the family.’

*Katyāyana* (Vivādaratnakara, pp. 50 and 54).—‘If the father is an
invalid, even though alive,—or if he has been away from the country for
twenty years,—the debts contracted by him should be paid by his sons.
The debt contracted by the family, either during illness, or during a
calamity, or in connection with the daughter’s marriage, or a Śrāddha,
should be paid by the head of the family.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रतीतार्थ एव श्लोकः ॥ ८.१६५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

166	If the debtor be dead and (the money borrowed) was expended for the family, it must be paid by the relatives out of their own estate even if they are divided.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/167_kuTumbArthe.adhyadhIno.md">
<details open><summary><h3>167 कुटुम्बार्थे ऽध्यधीनो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

कुटुम्बार्थे ऽध्यधीनो ऽपि  
व्यवहारं यम् आचरेत् ।  
स्वदेशे वा विदेशे वा  
तं ज्यायान् न विचालयेत्  ॥ ८.१६७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/167_kuTumbArthe.adhyadhIno.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Should even a servant effect a transaction for the sake of the family,—the master, whether in his own country or abroad, should not repudiate it.—(167)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तिष्ठन्तु तावद् भ्रात्रादयः । **कुटुम्बार्थे ऽध्यधीनो ऽपि**[^४९६] गृहभृत्यो[^४९७] ऽपि **व्यवहारं** गोपश्वादिविक्रयं क्षेत्रस्थण्डिलादिप्रयोगं कर्षणाय ऋणं व्यवहारं वा **यम् आचरेत्** **स्वदेशे विदेशे वा** संनिहितस्य प्रोषितस्य वा, **तं ज्यायान्** गृहस्वामी **न विचालयेत्** अविचार्यैव साधु कृतम् इत्य् अनुमन्येत । 


[^४९७]:
     M G DK: gṛhakramabhṛtyo


[^४९६]:
     M G DK (1: 555) add: tu

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु पूर्वशेषो ऽयम् अर्थवादो न विधिर् इत्य् आहुः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;तद् उक्तम् । न ह्य् अर्थवादताबीजं किंचिद् अस्ति । विभज्यमानं साकाङ्क्षम् ऋणम् अत्र[^४९८] यत्तच्छब्दाभिसंबन्धात्[^४९९] । 


[^४९९]:
     M G: atra śabdābhisaṃbandhāpi vā; J: yattacchabdābhisaṃbaddham


[^४९८]:
     J omits: ṛṇam atra

अथ "मत्तोन्मत्तार्ताध्यधीनैः" (म्ध् ८.१६३) इत्य्[^५००] अस्वातन्त्र्याद् अध्यधीनस्य,[^५०१] तत्कृतम् अप्रमाणम्[^५०२] इति । अकुटुम्बार्थे संनिहिते[^५०३] च स्वामिनि न युक्तं कल्पयितुम् । अन्यथा कुटुम्बावसादः स्यात् । अतस् तद्भरणात्मके व्यापारे प्रमाणीभवति दैवाद् अधीनः[^५०४] ॥ ८.१६७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

To say nothing of the brother and other relatives: ‘*for the sake of the
family*,’ if even a servant should ‘*effect a transaction*,’—in the form
of selling clothes or such things, of contracting debts and doing other
kinds of business relating to the proper looking after and cultivation
of fields and barren lands,—the master of the house, whether in his own
country or abroad, on coming to know of it, ‘*shall not repudiate it*’;
*i.e*, without thinking over it, he should approve it as properly done.
The pronouns ‘that,’ and ‘what,’ refer to what is done relating to such
fields and agricultural business as may he spoilt.

Others have taken this verse as a hortatory supplement to the foregoing
verse, and not as an injunction.

But this is not right; as we find no grounds for taking it as a mere
hortatory supplement.

It might be argued that what has been said in verse 163, regarding the
‘transaction effected by the drunk, the insane, the servant, etc.,’ as
being done by persons not master of themselves, makes it clear that the
transaction effected by the servant cannot he valid.

But this must refer to the cases where the master is present on the
spot, and not otherwise; as in that case the family would he in the risk
of being ruined. Hence during the master’s absence, what is done by the
servant by the maintenance of the family must he regarded as valid (167)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Adhyadhīnaḥ*’—‘Servant’ (Medhātithi and Nārāyaṇa);—‘slave’
(Kullūka);—‘Youngest brother and one in some such position
(Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 232) as indicating the
necessary character of the maintaining of the family;—in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 55), which explains ‘*Ādhyadhīna*’ as ‘servants
and others,’ and ‘*jyāyān*’ as ‘the master’;—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 164), to the effect that a debt cannot be repudiated if
it has been contracted for the support of the family, even if it may
have been contracted by a dependant without the master’s permission;—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (76b), which explains ‘*adhyadhīnaḥ*’ as ‘the slave and
the like—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 40a), which explains
‘*adhyadhīnaḥ*’ *as* ‘son, nephew, slaves and so forth.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.166-167)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.166].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **कुटुम्बार्थे ऽध्यधीनो ऽपि व्यवहारं यम् आचरेत् ।**

कुटुम्बस्थित्यै स्वाम्यसंनिधाने —

> **स्वदेशे वा विदेशे वा तं ज्यायान्**

अध्यधीनस्वामी

> **न विचारयेत्  ॥ ८.१६६ ॥**


"मम परोक्षे ऽप्य् एतद् अध्यधीनेन त्वया कर्म कस्मात् क्र्तम्" इति न विचारयेत् । एवम् अविचार्य तद्धनं प्रतिकुर्यात् । अथ वा पूर्वश्लोकशेषार्थो ऽयं वर्णनीयः । कथं कृत्वा । **कुटुम्बार्थे** ऽप्य् अधीनो ऽपि तावद् **व्यवहारं यम् आचरेत्** प्रमाणीभवेत् ज्यायसः, किं पुनर् बान्धवानाम् । एवं च सति मत्तोन्मत्ताध्यधीनकृतो व्यवहारो न सिध्यतीत्य् उक्तम् । अथ त्व् "असंबन्धकृतो व्यवहारो न सिध्यति" इत्य् एतस्माच् छक्यते कथंचिद् अध्यधीनस्य ज्यायसि परोक्षे गृहार्थे स्वातन्त्र्यं कल्पयितुम् । ततः सार्थ एवायं श्लोको यथैनम् अवोचाम सामर्थम् । कुटुम्बार्थं पुनर् अध्यधीनस्य धनं प्रयुक्तम् — ॥ ८.१६६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

167	Should even a person wholly dependent make a contract for the behoof of the family, the master (of the house), whether (living) in his own country or abroad, shall not rescind it.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/168_balAd_dattam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>168 बलाद् दत्तम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

बलाद् दत्तं बलाद् भुक्तं  
बलाद् यच् चाऽपि लेखितम् ।  
सर्वान् बलकृतान् अर्थान्  
अकृतान् मनुर् अब्रवीत्  ॥ ८.१६८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/168_balAd_dattam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

What is given by force, what is ennjoyed by force, what has been caused to be written by force,—all thansactions effected by force Manu has declared to be void.—(168)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यथा न बालास्वतन्त्राप्रकृतिस्थोपधिकृत्ं प्रमाणं तद्वद् बलकृतम् अपि । **सर्वान् बलकृतान् अर्थान्** निवर्त्यान्[^५०५] इत्य् एव विधिः । **भुक्तं दत्तं लेखितम्**[^५०६] इत्य् उदाहरणमात्रम् । तत्र **बलाद् दत्तं** यद् अनुपयुज्यमानं क्षेत्रारामादि वाहनाय दीयते वृद्धिकामो वा यद् धनं बलाद्[^५०७] आरोपयति भारवाहनम् अनिच्छतां गृहेषु मूलार्पणं पण्यम् अश्नुते । **लेखितं** पत्रकरणम् । **सर्वान्** इत्य् अन्यान् अप्य् एवंविधान् **अर्थान्** कार्याणीत्य् अर्थः । "योगाधमनम्"[^५०८] (म्ध् ८.१६५) इति अत्र निपुणं दर्शितम् अत्रापि श्लोके समस्य योगबले शक्ये[^५०९] प्रक्षेप्तुं पृथक् श्लोकद्वयकरणम् । विचित्रा श्लोकस्य कृतिर् मनोः ।


[^५०९]:
     M G J: yogabalaśakye


[^५०८]:
     M G: yogāvāpanam; DK: yogādhamanavikrītam


[^५०७]:
     M G DK: daivād


[^५०६]:
     M G: lekhyalekhitam


[^५०५]:
     DK (1: 556): nivartayed

- मत्तोन्मत्तार्ताधधीनैर्[^५१०] बालवृद्धैर्[^५११] बलात् कृतः[^५१२] ।


[^५१२]:
     M G: balākṛtiḥ; DK: balāt kṛtiḥ


[^५११]:
     M G: bālavṛddhir; DK: bālavṛddha-


[^५१०]:
     DK: -dhīna-

- असंबद्धेन[^५१३] योगाच् च व्यवहारो[^५१४] न सिध्यति ॥ इति ।


[^५१४]:
     M G: vyavahārau; J: kṛto vyavahāro


[^५१३]:
     M G: asaṃvardheta; DK: asaṃbandhena

न[^५१५] सिद्ध्यत्य् एव न मानवद् भवति ॥ ८.१६८ ॥


[^५१५]:
     M G omit: na
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Just as what is done by minors and by persons who are not their own
masters, or who are not in their senses, and what is done fraudulently,
is not valid, so also is everything that is done by force. The sense of
the present injunction thus is that ‘all transactions effected by force
should be rescinded’; and ‘*what is given*,’ ‘*what is enjoyed*’ and
‘*what is caused to be written*’ have been mentioned only as examples.

‘*What is given by force*,’—*e.g*., when useless fields and farms are
given for purposes of cultivation: or when money is forcibly advanced on
interest.:—all this being forced upon people who are not desirous of
being burdened with such sifts, while they are at their own house (and
have not gone to seek for them); and it is done on the strength of an
ordinary bond (without witness, etc.).

‘*All*’—*i.e*., the transactions similar to those mentioned.

Though this matter has been already dealt with under verse CLXV where
all ‘fraudulent sales and mortgages, etc.’

are declared to be invalid, yet the two verses have been added for the
purpose of including ‘fraud’ and ‘force’ also among the invalidating
causes. Peculiar is the style adopted by Manu. All that is meant is that
‘transactions effected by persons who are drunk or insane or distressed,
or minor or senile, and also those done by fraud or force, are not
valid;—they are never valid or binding.’—(168)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 231);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(65b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 39b and 60a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

[\[See the texts under
165.\]]

*Viṣṇu* (7.6).—‘A document, if it has been caused to be written by
force, makes no evidence.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**बलात्** तावद् **दत्तं** वृद्धिकामेन धनं क्षेत्राध्याधिभोगकामेन च तन् निवर्त्यं राज्ञा । **बलाच्** च **भुक्तम्** आधिद्रव्यं प्रतिषिद्धेन सता तद् आधिभोगान्वेषणेन निवर्त्यम् । अथ वा नाधिद्र्व्यम् अपि गृहादि बलाद् भुक्तं दशवर्षभोगेनैतद् अपहर्तिष्यामीत्य् अनया भुद्ध्या । **बलाद् यच् चापि लेखितं** पत्रे सर्वांश् चैवं प्रकारान् अन्यान् अप्य् अर्थान् साक्षित्वप्रतिभूकुलग्रहणकालावधिद्वैगुण्यकरणान निर्वर्त्यम् **मनुर्** आह ॥ ८.१६७ ॥

_ये[न] —_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

168	What is given by force, what is enjoyed by force, also what has been caused to be written by force, and all other transactions done by force, Manu has declared void.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/169_trayaH_parArthe.md">
<details open><summary><h3>169 त्रयः परार्थे ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

त्रयः परार्थे क्लिश्यन्ति  
साक्षिणः प्रतिभूः कुलम् ।  
चत्वारस् तूपचीयन्ते  
विप्र आढ्यो वणिङ् नृपः  ॥ ८.१६९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/169_trayaH_parArthe.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Three persons suffer for the sake of others: witnesses, surety and the judge: while four persons prosper: the brāhmaṇa, the affluent, the merchant and the king.—(169)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

परेणार्थ्यमाने साक्ष्यं प्रातिभाव्यं व्यवहारेक्षणं[^५१६] च कर्तव्यम् कुलादिभिः, न स्वयम् उपेत्य हट्ःआत् । अतः स्वयं कुर्वन्तो न प्रमाणीभवन्ति । अथ वा परस्यार्थं कुर्वन्तः क्लेशम् आप्नुवन्ति । न ह्य् एषां स्वार्थगन्धो ऽस्ति । अतो बलान् न कारयितव्याः । **कुलं** वृद्धपुरुषाः[^५१७] । 


[^५१७]:
     M G: vṛddhayuṣāḥ; J omits: kulaṃ vṛddhapuruṣāḥ


[^५१६]:
     M G: vyavahāreṇa kṣaṇaṃ

- परेण वार्थ्यमाना **विप्रा**दय **उपचीयन्ते** । अतो न हठाद् अनिच्छन् विप्रः प्रतिग्रहीतव्यः[^५१८] । अथ वा परसंबन्धिनो ऽर्थायोपचयो विप्रस्य — अतः स्वार्था प्रवृत्तिर् न परार्थैव — तेन विप्रेण न बलात् तद्दानादाने[^५१९] प्रवर्तनीयम् । हठबलसाध्यं[^५२०] दानम् इति लोकप्रवादो न दापयन्तं निषेधति, तद् इच्छन्तं दापयेत् । याच्ञया तु[^५२१] बलम् । 


[^५२१]:
     DK add: na


[^५२०]:
     M G J: hatabalasādhyaṃ


[^५१९]:
     M G J: tadanādāne


[^५१८]:
     M G: vipraṃ pratigrahītavyāḥ

- एवम् **आढ्यः** कुशीदवृत्तिर् धनवान् इव न प्रयोजनीयः । किम् इति कुसीदं व्यवहारे ऽन्यस्मै ददाति न मह्यम् इति । अथ वा तेन बलतो[^५२२] ऽन्यस्मिन् नेच्छति[^५२३] तद् व्ययं कुर्वति[^५२४] न[^५२५] धनम् आरोपयितव्यम् । यतः परेणार्थ्यमान उपचीयते न बलात् प्रयुञ्जानः, शास्त्रनिषेधात् । 


[^५२५]:
     M G J omit: na (I think Jha's translation presupposes this na)


[^५२४]:
     M G: kurvad


[^५२३]:
     M G: necchanti


[^५२२]:
     M G: balavato; J: balavatā

एवं **वणिक्** कुसीदी[^५२६] धनवृद्धिकाम एव व्यवहारयति । **वणिक्** पण्यजीवी ।   

**नृपो** राजापि प्रयुक्तराजदण्डम् आददान उपचीयते । न तु बलादिप्रोत्साहनेन व्यवहारयन् । तद् उक्तम् "नोत्पादायेत्[^५२७] स्वयं कार्यम्" (म्ध् ८.४३) इति । 



[^५२७]:
     M G J: notsāhāyet

विप्रादीनां विधिर् अनुवादो राज्ञो दृष्टान्तार्थः । अथ वा सर्वस्योदाहरणप्रपञ्चः, तथाग्रेतनो ऽपि ॥ ८.१६९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It is only on being requested by another person that the witness, the
surety and the Judge should either appear as a witness, stand surety or
investigate case’s,—and not forcibly (thrusting themselves); hence if
these persons should volunteer to do it, their action has no validity.

Or, the meaning may he that ‘these persons undergo suffering for doing
the work of other persons,—and they have not. the slightest selfish
motive,—hence they should not ho forced to do the work.’

The *Brāhmaṇa* and the rest, on the other hand, ‘*prosper*,’ being
approached by others, lienee, the Brāhmaṇa also should not he forced,
against his will, to accept a gift.

Or, the meaning may be that—‘the prosperity of the Brāhmaṇa is for the
good of others,’—his action therefore is always for the sake of others,
and not for his own,—hence in his case gifts and acceptances should not
he rescinded.’ There is a popular saying to the effect that ‘a gift by
force is condemned,’ but this does not mean that one should not make a
person make gifts to others; the ‘force’ in this case (which is
condemned) is ‘importunate begging.’

Similarly the ‘*affluent*,’ the rich man who makes a living by
money-lending, should not be forced by such expostulations as—‘why does
this man advance money on interest to other persons and not to me?’

Or, the meaning may be that ‘no loan shall he forced upon an unwilling
spendthrift;—as it is only when money is lent at the request of the
other party that the money-lender prospers, and not when he forces the
loan upon him, since such forcing is forbidden by law.’

Similarly, ‘*the merchant*,’ like the money-lender, carries on his
business only with a view to add to his wealth. The ‘merchant’ is one
who lives by buying and selling.

‘*King*’—prospers only when receiving lines imposed upon persons charged
before him,—and not by forcing or encouraging such suits and charges. To
this end there is the declaration that ‘the king shall not encourage
law-suits.’

The case of the ‘Brāhmaṇa’ and the rest has been cited only for the
purpose of illustrating what is enjoined regarding the duty of the
*king*.

Or, the whole of the present verse, as also the next, is meant to be
illustrative of the entire section.—(169)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kulam*’—‘Judge’ (Kullūka and Govindarāja)—‘undivided family’ (Nārāyaṇa
and Rāghavānanda);—‘member of a family’ (Nandana, who is misrepresented
by Hopkins, who wrongly translates ‘Kulīnaḥ’ (?) *as friend* ).
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यस्मात् परस्यार्थं कुर्वन्ति दृष्टानि साक्षिप्रतिभूकुलानि, अतो नानिच्छातस् तानि कारयेत् साक्ष्यादीनि । **चत्वारस् तूपचीयन्ते** विप्रादयः परार्थम् एव कुर्वन्तः, **विप्रस्** तावन् नादित्सन्तं दापयेत् दातारम्, **आढ्यश्** च वृद्ध्यर्थम् अजिघृक्षन्तं न ग्राहयेत्, **वणिक्** च नाचिकीर्षन्तं कारयेत् लाभार्थी । एवं नृपो ऽपि नाव्यवजिहीर्षन्तं व्यवहारयेत् । एवं च सत्य् अयं श्लोको ऽर्थस्य बलात् कृतस्य पदार्थस्य निवृत्तिप्रदर्शनार्थो ऽपि विज्ञेयः । यतश् चैतद् एवम् अतो बलवान् अपि सन् राजा, व्यवहाराद् अन्यत्र — ॥ ८.१६८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

169	Three suffer for the sake of others, witnesses, a surety, and judges; but four enrich themselves (through others), a Brahmana, a money-lender, a merchant, and a king.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/170_anAdeyan_nAdadIta.md">
<details open><summary><h3>170 अनादेयन् नाददीत ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अनादेयं नाददीत  
परिक्षीणो ऽपि पार्थिवः ।  
न चादेयं समृद्धो ऽपि  
सूक्ष्मम् अप्य् अर्थम् उत्सृजेत्  ॥ ८.१७० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/170_anAdeyan_nAdadIta.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Even though reduced (in circumstances), the King shall not take what ought not to be taken; and even though affluent, he shall not relinquish what ought to be taken, be it ever so small.—(170)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

करदण्डशुल्कादि शास्त्रविहितं वर्जयित्वान्यत् पौरधनम् **अनादेयं** राज्ञः[^५२८] क्षीणकोशस्यापि । यत् तु शास्त्रन्यायागतं रक्षानिर्वेशधनं तत् **सूक्ष्मं** कार्षापणमात्रम् **अपि न** त्यजेत् । तद् उक्तम्-


[^५२८]:
     M G: rājñā

वल्मीकपथवद् राजा कोशवृद्धिं तु कारयेत् । इति ॥ ८.१७० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Excepting his legal dues, in the shape of taxes, tines and duties, all
that belongs to the citizens is ‘*what ought not to be taken*’ by the
king, even though his treasury may have become depleted. But what is
legally his due,—by reason of his arranging for the security of their
life and property-even a pice of that he shall not relinquish. Since it
has been laid down that—‘the King shall increase his treasury in the
manner of the ant-hill.’—(170)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 275).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.170-171)**

*Vaśiṣṭha* (19.14-15).—‘Let the King not take property for his own use
from the inhabitants of the realm. Only the measures and price of such
property shall he liable to deduction by way of taxation.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.338-339).—‘If the King increases his treasury out of
his realm, in an illegal manner, he, very soon, loses his property and
becomes ruined, along with his relations. The fire arising out; of the
harassment of his people becomes extinguished only after it has consumed
the king’s family, prosperity and his very life.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do.).—‘If the King realises from his realm, in an unlawful
manner, either lines or taxes, or tolls or share of agricultural
produce, he incurs sin. The King who rules in the right maimer, without
covetousness, obtains sons and his treasury and kingdom prosper.’

*Mahāhhārata* (Do.).—‘If the King’s treasure is obtained righteously, he
rules the entire earth, even though his strength may not be great.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

_येन । _
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

170	No king, however indigent, shall take anything that ought not to be taken, nor shall he, however wealthy, decline taking that which he ought to take, be it ever so small.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/171_anAdeyasya_chAdAnAd.md">
<details open><summary><h3>171 अनादेयस्य चादानाद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अनादेयस्य चादानाद्  
आदेयस्य च वर्जनात् ।  
दौर्बल्यं ख्याप्यते राज्ञः  
स प्रेत्येह च नश्यति  ॥ ८.१७१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/171_anAdeyasya_chAdAnAd.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

By the taking of what he ought not to take and by the relinquishing of what he ought to take the king’s weakness becomes proclaimed, and he becomes ruined here as also after death.—(171)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अनादानार्हम् **अनादेयम्** । "अर्हे कृत्यः" (पाण् ३.३.१६९) । तच् च दर्सितम् । **दौर्बल्यं ख्याप्यते** प्रकृतिभिः[^५२९] "अस्मान् दण्डयति, स्तेनाटविकसामन्तादीन् न शक्तो विजेतुम्" इति । परेष्व् अशक्तिं[^५३०] प्रथयन्ति राष्ट्रीयाः । अतस् तैर् अभिषेण्यमानो विरक्तप्रकृतिर् इह नश्यति । आदानाद् **इह, प्रेत्य** च अधर्मदण्डनात्[^५३१] ॥ ८.१७१ ॥


[^५३१]:
     J: ca dharmadaṇḍanāt (but Jha's translation presupposes the negative)


[^५३०]:
     M G J: pare svaśaktiṃ (I follow DK 4: 1344)


[^५२९]:
     M G add: asmābhir
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*What ought not to be taken*’ is that which he is not entitled to
receive; the verbal affix denoting *title*.

‘*Weakness becomes proclaimed*’—*by* his subjects, who say—‘This king
punishes us, but he is unable to suppress thieves, robbers and
recalcitrant tributary kings’; his enemies also assert their power; and
being attacked by these, ho becomes disgusted with life and thus
‘*becomes ruined here*’—in this world—and by taking what he ought not to
take—*i.e*., by imposing illegal fines, etc.—he ‘*becomes ruined, after
death*’ also.—(171)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 275).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.170-171)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.170].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अत्र चादेयापरिवर्जननियमः शास्त्रसामर्थ्यात् । अतो वर्ज[नीयवर्जयितुः ॥ ८.१७० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

171	In consequence of his taking what ought not to be taken, or of his refusing what ought to be received, a king will be accused of weakness and perish in this (world) and after death.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/172_svAdAnAd_varNasaMsargAt.md">
<details open><summary><h3>172 स्वादानाद् वर्णसंसर्गात् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

स्वादानाद् वर्णसंसर्गात् त्व्  
अबलानां च रक्षणात् ।  
बलं संजायते राज्ञः  
स प्रेत्येह च वर्धते  ॥ ८.१७२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/172_svAdAnAd_varNasaMsargAt.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

By taking what is his due, by the proper adjustment of castes, and by protecting the weak, the power of the king grows, and he prospers here as also after death.—(172)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

स्वस्य न्यायप्राप्तस्य्**आदानम्**, शोभनं वादानम् । भव्यम् एव शोभनम् । **वर्णयोर्** एव **संसर्गः** समानजातीयैर् **वर्णसंसर्गः** । द्विष्ठत्वात् संसर्गस्य च संबन्धिनोर् अश्रुतत्वाद् वर्णानां प्रस्तुतत्वात् तत्रैवापेक्षा युक्ता । यस् तु वर्णानाम् अवान्तरप्रभवैः[^५३२] संसर्गो नासौ वर्णानाम् एव संबन्धितया व्यपदेष्टुं शक्यते । 


[^५३२]:
     M G: -prabhave

कश्चित् तु नकारं पठति- "वर्णासंसर्गात्" इति । सर्वथा वर्णसंकरप्रतिषेधानुवादो ऽयम् । दुर्बलानां बलवद्विद्वेशिभिर् अभिभूयमानानां तेभ्यस्[^५३३] त्राणाद् धेतोः ।  

**राज्ञो बलं संजायते** । सम्यग्व्यवहारदर्शनं कर्तव्यम् अधर्मदण्डनं[^५३४] च न कर्तव्यम् इत्य् एतद्विशेषाः पठिष्यन्ते श्लोकानाम् अर्थवादाः ॥ ८.१७२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Svādānam*’;—the ‘*ādā* *na*,’ ‘taking’ of his ‘*sva*,’ ‘what is his
due.’ Or it may be explained as ‘*su*’—‘good’—‘*ādāna*’—‘receiving’;
‘good’ here standing for what is proper.

‘*Adjustment of castes*,’—*i.e*., the admixture of the persons of two
castes with members of the same caste; we take it as ‘*two*,’ because an
‘admixture’ presupposes *two* relatives; and as no other relatives are
mentioned we take the ‘adjustment’ or ‘admixture’ as pertaining to
*castes*. The mixture that takes place among the subdivisions of various
castes cannot be called an ‘adjustment of the castes.’ because it does
not pertain to the ‘castes’ pure and simple.

*Ṛju* however reads a negative particle here; in which case this would
be a reiteration of the prohibition of the ‘crossing’ of castes.

Also on account of ‘*protecting the weak*’ from the ‘strong,’ when they
are suffering at the hands of these latter,—‘*the power of the king
grown*.’

The sense of all this is that.—‘The King should investigate the cases
properly, and should never inflict illegal penalties’;—and it is as a
hortatory supplement to this injunction that we are going to have a
number of passages.—(172)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 275), which adds
the following notes;—‘*Svādānāt*’, ‘by taking what is his own legally,
such as taxes and so forth’;—‘*varṇasaṃsargāt*’, ‘by marriages and such
relationships contracted by the Brāhmaṇa’ and other castes with persons
of their own respective castes’; the ‘*saṃsarga*’ of different castes is
not meant, as that would lead to the evil of ‘mixed castes.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (18.5-7, 33, 43).—‘The King shall be careful to protect all
orders and the constituent elements of the state... Whenever any caste
should remain behind others, or exceed its limits,—seeing that it has
strayed from its path,—the King shall bring it back to the path of duty.
So also when other wicked acts, opposed to the dictates of the sacred
law, have been committed, the King after having reflected upon the
matter shall inflict punishment on those who deserve it... The King’s
duties are the protecting of his subjects, the honouring of the aged and
the wise, the trying of law-suits and making each caste abide by its
duties...... If a ruler, though severe, is mindful of his duty, correct
in his conduct find quick to punish the wicked and to protect the
virtuous,—his wealth is declared to he pure.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.315).—‘What he has not obtained, he should seek to
obtain lawfully.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यथाशास्त्रं पुनर् अस्य वर्तमानस्य, व्यवहारेभ्यो ऽन्यतश् च पौरजानपदेभ्यस् तद्द्रव्यादानाद्, दुर्बलानां च बलवद्भ्यो रक्षणाद्, वर्णानाम् असर्गः परस्परेणासङ्करः प्रजासु भवति । ततश् च राजा **प्रेत्येह वर्धत** इति । अधिकृतविधिस्तुतिमात्रम् इदम् ॥ ८.१७१ ॥

_यस्माच् चैतद् एवम् ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

172	By taking his due, by preventing the confusion of the castes (varna), and by protecting the weak, the power of the king grows, and he prospers in this (world) and after death.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/173_tasmAd_yama.md">
<details open><summary><h3>173 तस्माद् यम ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

तस्माद् यम इव स्वामी  
स्वयं हित्वा प्रियाप्रिये ।  
वर्तेत याम्यया वृत्त्या  
जित-क्रोधो जितेन्द्रियः  ॥ ८.१७३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/173_tasmAd_yama.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For these reasons, the King shall, like Yama, renounce his likes and dislikes, and behave in the manner of Yama,—his anger suppressed and his senses controlled.—(173)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तथा चैतद् एव प्रपञ्चयति । अयं सेवक आत्मीयः, अतः **प्रियः**, अयं च[^५३५] केवलं राष्ट्रवासी, यस्यैव राष्ट्रं तम् एवावतिष्ठते, अतो **ऽप्रियः** । तद् **हित्वा**[^५३६] **यमवत्** प्रजासु तुल्यः परिपालने व्यवहारे च स्यात् । ईदृशी हि यमस्य वृत्तिर् दृष्टा । यमस्येत्य् अणो बाधकं तत्रौपसंख्यानिकं यकारम् इच्छन्ति । कः पुनर् यमतुल्यतां भजति, **जितक्रोधो जितेन्द्रियः** । रागद्वेषौ जयेत्, प्रत्यासङ्गाख्यानेन[^५३७] ॥ ८.१७३ ॥


[^५३७]:
     M G DK: prasaṅgākhyānena


[^५३६]:
     M G: tad viditvā; DK: tad dhi hitvā


[^५३५]:
     M G DK (I: 1931): na _for _ayaṃ ca
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The same idea is further expounded.

‘This servant is my own and hence I *like* him,—this other is only an
inhabitant of my kingdom, and is proceeding against the former, hence I
*dislike* him’;—all such ideas he should renounce.

In the protecting of, and dealings with, his subjects, he shall be
entirely impartial, like Yuma; the ‘*manner of Yama*’ having been found
to be strictly impartial. The form ‘*yāmyayā*’ is explained by the
exclusion of the ‘*yaṇ*’ affix mentioned in Pāṇini 6.4.148 and the
addition of the syllable ‘*ya*’ under one of the additional rules.

“Who is the person who becomes like Yama?”

He who has ‘*his anger suppressed and senses controlled*’;—*i* .*e*.,
one should renounce all attachment and thus overcome love and
hatred.—(173)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, 2b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (18.30).—‘When the King, having seated himself full of majesty
on the throne of judgment, deals out punishment, equitable towards all
creatures, he is called *Vaivasvata* or *Yama*.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

समः प्रजासु स्याद् इत्य् अस्य राज्ञो ऽयम् उपमार्थः । तथा च वैषम्यहेतुव्याख्यानम् आह जितक्रोधो जितेन्द्रिय इति ॥ ८.१७२ ॥

_अजितकामक्रोधश् च पुनः पार्थिवः ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

173	Let the prince, therefore, like Yama, not heeding his own likings and dislikings, behave exactly like Yama, suppressing his anger and controlling himself.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/174_yas_tv.md">
<details open><summary><h3>174 यस् त्व् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यस् त्व् अधर्मेण कार्याणि  
मोहात् कुर्यान् नराधिपः ।  
अचिरात् तं दुर्-आत्मानं  
वशे कुर्वन्ति शत्रवः  ॥ ८.१७४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/174_yas_tv.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If an evil-minded king, through folly, deal with cases unjustly,—his enemies bring him under their control in no time.—(174)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अधर्मेण यः कार्याणी** कुरुते स **मोहाद्** एवेह व्यामूढो धर्मं जह्यात् । तस्येदम् अधर्मजं[^५३८] फलम्- विरक्तप्रकृतितया **वशे कुर्वन्ति शत्रवः** । विरक्ता हि प्रकृतयः क्रुद्धलुब्धभीतावमानिताः परैर् उपजप्येरन् । ततश् च बहुकृत्वो[^५३९] **वशे कुर्वन्ति** । दण्डयन्ति बध्नन्ति घ्नन्ति राष्ट्रम् अपहरन्ति चेत्य् एष वशीकारः ॥ ८.१७४ ॥


[^५३९]:
     M G: bahukṛtya


[^५३८]:
     M G: dharmajaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If the king ‘*deal with eases unjustly*,’ it is only ‘*through folly*’
that he neglects the Law; and the fruit of this transgression is that
his people having become disaffected, ‘*his enemies bring him under
their control*’;—when the people become disaffected, they become a lot
of angry, greedy, frightened and ill-treated persons, and are easily won
over by his enemies, who, thereupon attack him, capture him, strike at
him and take away his kingdom;—this is what is meant by ‘*bringing under
control*.’— (174)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (6b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 39a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.174-175)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (1.353-354).—‘Punishment inflicted lawfully rejoices the
worlds; otherwise it makes them discomforted.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अपरक्तप्रकृतिम्, बहुकृत्यवन्तं वृद्धपर्यवसानादिभिः । पुनर् आहितविज्ञाननिर्णयः सन् राजा — ॥ ८.१७३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

174	But that evil-minded king who in his folly decides causes unjustly, his enemies soon subjugate.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/175_kAma-krodhau_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>175 काम-क्रोधौ तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

काम-क्रोधौ तु संयम्य  
यो ऽर्थान् धर्मेण पश्यति ।  
प्रजास् तम् अनुवर्तन्ते  
समुद्रम् इव सिन्धवः  ॥ ८.१७५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/175_kAma-krodhau_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When however, having subdued love and hatred, he deals with cases justly, his subjects turn towards him, as the rivers towards the ocean,—(175)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सिन्धवो** नद्यो यथा **समुद्रम्** आश्रयन्ति, आश्रिताश् चानुरागिण्यस् तन्मय्यो वसन्ति, न ततो निवर्तन्ते, एवं कामक्रोधजयाद् राजानं प्रजाः समयोगक्षेमास् तन्मय्यः संपद्यन्ते ॥ ८.१७५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Just as ‘*Rivers*’— streams—take refuge with the ocean and having taken
refuge, become attached to it, and continue to remain merged in it, and
never turn back,—similarly the subjects turn towards the king, when he
subdues love and hatred, and coming to have their interests common with
the king, become merged into him.—(175)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Hopkins refers to Ṛgveda 1.32.3 for a similar imagery. This verse is
quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, 2b);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(4a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 39a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.174-175)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.174].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यथा हि सिन्धवो गम्यं समुद्रं गत्वा न निवर्तन्ते किं तर्हि तन्मय्यो भवन्ति, एवम् इत्थंभूतस्य राज्ञो नापराध्यन्ते प्रकृतयो ऽमात्यादयः, किं तर्हि तन्मय्यो भवन्तीत्य् अयम् उपमार्थः ॥ ८.१७४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

175	If, subduing love and hatred, he decides the causes according to the law, (the hearts of) his subjects turn towards him as the rivers (run) towards the ocean.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/176_yaH_sAdhayantam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>176 यः साधयन्तम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यः साधयन्तं छन्देन  
वेदयेद् धनिकं नृपे ।  
स राज्ञा तच् चतुर्भागं  
दाप्यस् तस्य च तद् धनम्  ॥ ८.१७६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/176_yaH_sAdhayantam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A person who complains to the king against the creditor trying to accomplish his purpose by his own will,—should be made by the king to pay the fourth part, and also the total amount to him—(176)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**छन्द** इच्छा । तेन राजानम् अज्ञापयित्वा यदा प्रागुक्तैश् चतुर्भिर् उपायैः स्वेच्छया[^५४०] धनमार्गेण प्रवृत्तं तथाभूतं वा राजपुरुषैर्[^५४१] आह्वानयेत्, अहम् अनेनैतत्प्रदेशे रुध्ये, देहि धनम् इति[^५४२] । स च पृष्टो[^५४३] धारयामीति यत् प्रतिपद्यते, स राज्ञा चतुर्थं भागं दण्डापयितव्यः । यावत् तस्मै धारयति तस्य तत्र सर्वम् ऋणं दाप्यः[^५४४] । शतं चेद् धारयति पञ्चविंशतिर् दण्डनीयः । शतं तस्य दाप्यः । एवं पञ्चविंशतिः[^५४५] । न त्व् इयं भ्रान्तिः कर्तव्या- शते[^५४६] राज्ञः पञ्चविंशति शिष्टं धनिकस्य । धनिको हि तथा दण्डितः स्यान् नर्णिकः ॥ ८.१७६ ॥


[^५४६]:
     M G J: śataṃ


[^५४५]:
     J omits: evaṃ pañcaviṃśatiḥ


[^५४४]:
     M G J omit: dāpyaḥ


[^५४३]:
     M G: cāpṛṣṭo


[^५४२]:
     M G: āhvayanenārhatarapradeśo 'nurudhyedaṃ hi dhanam iti; J: āhvānenārhatarapradeśe 'nurudhyedaṃ hi dhanam iti | The reading is suspect here; I follow DK. 


[^५४१]:
     M G DK: rājaputrair


[^५४०]:
     M G add: na; DK (1: 718) add: ca
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Will*’— wish; and ‘*by his own will*’ means ‘without filing his suit
with the king,’ just as he pleases,—not necessarily by the four
sanctioned methods of acquiring property;—if he is complained against,
and summoned by the king’s officers,—and then if the debtor, on being
questioned, should admit the debt, saying ‘I owe him such and such an
amount,’ then the latter should he fined a quarter of that debt, and the
total amount due he should be made to pay to the creditor ; *e.g*., if
he owes a *hundred*, he should he fined *twenty-five*, and should pay to
be creditor a *hundred*. We should not fall into the mistake that *a
hundred* less *twenty-five* is to be paid to the king and the balance,
*i.e*., twenty-fire to the creditor; as in this case the punishment
would fall upon the creditor and not upon the debtor.—(176)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (80b.)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (6.18-19).—‘A creditor recovering the sum lent by any lawful
means shall not he reproved by the Xing. If the debtor, so forced to
discharge the debt, complains to the King, he shall be fined in an equal
sum.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.40).—‘If the creditor tries to realise the loan that is
admitted, he shall not he reproved by the King. If, on being thus
pressed to pay, the debtor approaches the King, he should he fined and
made to repay the amount due to the creditor.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 645).—‘If the creditor harasses the debtor who
is acting lawfully, he shall forfeit the debt, and shall also be fined
the same amount.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.54).—‘When a debtor has acknowledged a debt, it may he
recovered from him by the expedients of friendly expostulation and the
rest, by moral suasion, by artful management, by compulsion and by
confinement in the house.’

*Nārada* (1.122, 123).

\[122 is same as [Manu
8.49]\].—

‘A creditor who tides to recover his loan from the debtor must not he
checked by the King, both for secular and religious reasons.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

राजवाल्लभ्याद् अबिभ्यन् यो राजपुरुषस् तस्मै धनिकम् आवेदये तस्य तथोपदेशं दण्डनं धनदानं च राजा कुर्यात् । अपरः पाऋहः- "यो ऽसाध्यं मन्यमानस् तु वेदयेद् धनिकं नरः, स राज्ञर्णचतुर्भागं दाप्यस् तस्य च तद्धनम्" । अत्रापि स एवार्थः । ईषद् अन्यथा भिन्नः। अशक्तस्य धनदान एतत् । धनदानायेदम् उपायान्तरम् अभिधीयते धनाभावतो वैकल्पिकः ॥ ८.१७५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

176	(The debtor) who complains to the king that his creditor recovers (the debt) independently (of the court), shall be compelled by the king to pay (as a fine) one quarter (of the sum) and to his (creditor) the money (due).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/177_karmaNApi_samam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>177 कर्मणापि समम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

कर्मणापि समं कुर्याद्  
धनिकायाऽधमर्णिकः ।  
समो ऽवकृष्टजातिस् तु  
दद्याच् छ्रेयांस् तु तच् छनैः  ॥ ८.१७७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/177_karmaNApi_samam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Even by labour shall the debtor make good what is due to the creditor, if he is of the same or of a lower caste; the superior person shall pay it up gradually.—(177)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

For verse 177, G gives the following which is NSm 1.112: अथ शक्तिविहीहः स्यात् ऋणी कालविपर्ययात् । प्रेक्ष्यश् च तम् ऋणं दाप्यः काले देशे यथोदयम् ॥ ८।१७७ ॥ And then gives the following commentary: यद्य् अधमर्णो दैवदोषान् निर्धनीभूतस् तदा न दुर्गादानादिना राज्ञोपपीडयितव्यः । किं तर्हि कर्तव्यं यदास्य कथंचिद् धनं भवेत् तदा यथासंभवं शनैर् दापयितव्यः । प्रेक्ष्य शक्तिं धनवृत्तां युज्यत इत्य् अर्थः । दाप्यः उचितस्य वक्ष्यति "कर्मणापि समः कुर्यात्" इति । तस्मात् कारणपरिवृत्तौ यद् एवोक्तम् अस्माभिस् तदैव प्रयोजनम् ॥ ८।१७७ ॥

निर्धनो ऽधमर्णो निर्धनत्वान् न मुच्यते । किं तर्हि, कर्म कारयितव्यः । प्रेष्यत्वं व्रजेत् । यावता धनेन तत् कर्म कर्मकरः करोति, तत् तस्य प्रविष्टं संपद्य्[^५४८] अपि कर्तव्यम् ।


[^५४८]:
M J: saṃsady

कर्म कुर्वतश् च सलाभधने प्रविष्टे दास्यान् मोक्षः । **समं कुर्यात्**, उत्तमर्णेन । अनन्तरं[^५४९] शुद्धे धने नोत्तमाधमव्यवहारः । इतरथैक उत्तमर्णो ऽपरो ऽधमर्ण[^५५०] एतच् च कार्यते । ब्राह्मणवर्णः[^५५१] **समः**, समानजातीयः, **अवकृष्टजातिर्** हीनजतीयः । **श्रेयांस्** **तू**त्तमजातीयो गुणाधिको वा । **शनैः** क्रमेण यथोत्पादं दद्यात् । नारदे पठ्यते- "ब्राह्मणस् तु परिक्षीणो शनैर् दद्याद् यथोदयम्[^५५२]" (न्स्म् २.४३) इति । अतो राज्ञा धनिकधनसंशुद्ध्यर्थं परिक्षीणो ब्राह्मणो न पीडयितव्यः, उत्तमर्णश् च रक्षणीयः ॥ ८.१७७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If the debtor has no property, he is not let off simply because he has
no property; he should he made to do ‘*labour*’; *i.e*., he should
become a servant, and the amount of wages that would, be payable to the
servant for doing the work that he does shall be credited to his
account; and when the total amount thus credited equals the sum of his
debt along with the interest, then he should be freed from service.

‘*Make good to the creditor*’; ‘*uttamarṇa*’ and ‘*udhamarṇa*’ are
relative terms applied to one or the other party on the basis of their
possessions.

The manual labour is made to be done by all who are of the same caste
as, or of the lower caste than, the creditor.

‘*The superior person*’—*i.e*., one belonging to a higher caste, or
possessed of higher qualifications—‘*shall pay it up gradually*’—*i.e*.,
according as he goes on earning. We read in Nārada—‘If the Brāhmaṇa is
poor, he shall pay up gradually according to his circumstances.’ Hence
for the liquidation of the creditor’s debts, the Brāhmaṇa shall not he
made by the king to suffer any pains; and the interests of the creditor
too have to be protected.—(177)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Cf*. 8.49, and 9.229; also 8.415.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.43), which explains the meaning
to be that “the debtor should make himself ‘*samam*’, equal, to the
creditor by putting an end ṭo the relation of creditor and debtor”;—in
*Aparārka* (p. 146), which explains the meaning to be that “even by
doing some work for the creditor, the debtor should make himself equal,
similar, to the creditor, by becoming free from debt”;—in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 70), which adds the following explanation:—The
debtor, who is either of the same caste with, or of a lower caste than,
the creditor, should, even by means of working, clear off his debt, and
thereby render himself *equal* to the creditor. So long as the debt is
not paid off, there is an *inequality* between them—one being the
*creditor* and the other the *debtor*; but when by means of work, the
debt has been paid off, both of them become ‘equal’.—But if the debtor
belongs to a *higher* caste, he should not be made by the creditor to
work for him.

It is quoted also in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 89);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(79b), which explains ‘*samam kuryāt*’ as ‘remove his *indebtedness*,
which puts him in a position lower than that of his creditor, by doing
such work for the latter as would suffice to liquify the amount of
debt’—‘*śreyān*’ is ‘one belonging to a higher caste’ and also ‘one
possessed of higher qualifications’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
104b), which also has the same explanation.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bṛhaspati* (11.59).—‘An indigent debtor may be taken by the creditor to
his own house and compelled to work there, such as distilling spirits
and the like; but a Brāhmaṇa should be made to pay gradually.’

*Nārada* (1.132).—“If a wealthy debtor, from malice, refuses to pay his
debt, the King shall compel him to pay it by forcible means, and shall
take five in the hundred for himself.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.43)—‘If the debtor of a lower caste is too indigent to
pay, the creditor shall make him do work; but an indigent Brāhmaṇa
should he made to pay gradually, as he obtains the means to pay.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

श्रेयसो मान्यत्वात् सोढव्यम् एव तस्याप्रदानात् । अक्षान्त्या तु न कदाचिद् अप्य् असौ समहीनवत् कर्मकारयितव्यः । ēणापादानार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.१७६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

177	Even by (personal) labour shall the debtor make good (what he owes) to his creditor, if he be of the same caste or of a lower one; but a (debtor) of a higher caste shall pay it gradually (when he earns something).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/178_anena_vidhinA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>178 अनेन विधिना ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अनेन विधिना राजा  
मिथो विवदतां नृणाम् ।  
साक्षिप्रत्ययसिद्धानि  
कार्याणि समतां नयेत्  ॥ ८.१७८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/178_anena_vidhinA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In this manner shall the king settle the disputes of men quarrelling among themselves, deciding them with the help of witnesses and other evidence.—(178)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अनेनेति** पूर्वोक्तप्रकारप्रत्यवमर्शः । **विधिना** प्रकारेण । **साक्षिप्रत्ययसिद्धानि**[^५५३] । **सिद्ध**शब्दः प्रत्येकम् अपि संबध्यते[^५५४] । साक्षिभिः सिद्धानि निर्णीतानि । प्रययः अनुमानं दैवी वा क्रिया । **कार्याणि** न केवलम् ऋणादानम् अन्यद् अपि । **समतां नयेत्**[^५५५] । अर्थिप्रत्यर्थिविप्रतिपत्तिम् अपाकुर्याद् ऐक्यमत्यम्[^५५६] उत्पादयेत् । 


[^५५६]:
     M G J: aikyam anyata


[^५५५]:
     M G: saṃmataṃ na yad


[^५५४]:
     J: abhisaṃbadhyate


[^५५३]:
     M G DK (1: 1907): sākṣipratyayaḥ

उपसंहृतम्[^५५७] ऋणादानम् । समाप्तो व्यवहारः, सर्वत्र जयपराजयप्रकाराणाम् एवंरूपतवात् । न हि साक्ष्यादिभ्य ऋते किंचिद् उत्तरेषु विवादेषु प्रतिपत्तिनिरासनिमित्तम् । केवलं दण्डविशेषस् तत्स्वरूपं च वक्तव्यम् इत्य् उत्तरः प्रपञ्चः । कीदृशो ऽस्वामिविक्रयः कीदृशो ऽनुशय इति स्वरूपं व्यवस्थाप्यते ॥ ८.१७८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*This*’ refers to all that has been said above.

‘*Manner*’—method.

‘*Deciding them with the help of witnesses and other
evidence*,’—‘Deciding’ is to be construed with each of the two names
‘*sūkṣi*’ (witness) and ‘*pratyaya*’ (evidence);—‘*evidence*’ standing
for inferences and ordeals.

‘*Disputes*’—Not only the *non-payment of debts*, but others, also.

‘*Settle*,’—*i.e*., remove the differences of opinion between the
plaintiff and the defendant: and restore them to agreement.

The treatment of the ‘non-payment of debts’ has been finished. This also
is the end of all suits; victory or defeat in all of them being
adjudicated on the same lines. Even in the ‘Heads of Dispute’ that
follow there is no other means available for deciding except ‘witnesses
And the rest’; the only difference that there is is in regard to the
character of the punishment to be inflicted, whose exact nature has got
to be prescribed; and it is for this purpose that we have the following
sections; and in course of this it shall also be determined what is
meant by ‘Selling without Ownership,’ ‘Rescission of Sale’ and so
forth.—(178)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Pratyaya*’—‘Inference and supernatural proof’
(Medhātithi);—‘inference, oaths and so forth’ (Govindarāja);—‘oaths’
(Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 618).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bṛhaspati* (27.25)—‘Thus let the King every day examine in common with
learned Brāhmaṇas, both the suits preferred by litigants and those
instituted by the King himself.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**प्रत्ययसिद्धानि** हेतुसिद्धानीत्य् अर्थः । ऋणव्यवहारोपसंहारार्थः श्लोकः । निक्षेपविध्यर्थम् इदम् अधुनोच्यते ॥ ८.१७७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

178	According to these rules let the king equitably decide between men, who dispute with each other the matters, which are proved by witnesses and (other) evidence.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/179_kulaje_vRttasampanne.md">
<details open><summary><h3>179 कुलजे वृत्तसम्पन्ने ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

कुलजे वृत्तसंपन्ने  
धर्मज्ञे सत्यवादिनि ।  
महापक्षे धनिन्य् आर्ये  
निक्षेपं निक्षिपेद् बुधः  ॥ ८.१७९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/179_kulaje_vRttasampanne.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The wise man shall, entrust a deposit to one who is born of good family, is endowed with character, cognisant of the law, and truthful, has a large following, and is wealthy and honourable—(179)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

प्रख्याताभिजनः **कुलजः** । यस्य पितृपितामहा विद्वांसो धार्मिका महापरिग्रहाः स्वकुलांशनिगृहीता[^५५८] नाकार्ये प्रवर्तन्ते । स हि स्वल्पाम् अपि गर्हणां सोढुम् असमर्थः । नितरां न[^५५९] च निन्दन्ति जनाः । **वृत्तं** शीलम् आचारो जनापवादभीरुता स्वाभाविकम् । **संपन्नः** तद् युक्तः । **धर्मज्ञस्** तु स्मृतिपुराणेतिहासाभ्याससंजाततदर्थावबोधः । **सत्यवादी** बहुकृत्वः कार्येष्व् अदृष्टाकार्ये[^५६०] संभाव्यमानो वृत्ताभिधानः । **महापक्षः** सुहृत्स्वजनराजामात्याद्यनुग्रहीतमहिमत्त्वेन[^५६१] दुष्टराजाधिकारिणां गम्यो न भवति । **धनी** स्वधनरक्षार्थम् अदृष्टभयाच् च न परद्रव्यापहारणे वर्तते- "अस्ति मे पर्याप्तं धनं किं परकीयेन, कथंचिज् ज्ञाते दण्ड्यः स्याम्" इति । **आर्यो** धर्मानुष्ठायी ऋजुप्रकृतिर् वा । **निक्षेपम्**[^५६२] । निक्षिप्यमाणं सुवर्णादिद्रव्यं कर्मसाधनेन घञोच्यते । निक्षिपेद् रक्षार्थं स्थापयेद् **बुधः** । एवं निक्षिपन् प्राज्ञो भवति । अन्यथा मूर्खः संपद्यते । 


[^५६२]:
     M G DK (1: 738) omits: nikṣepam


[^५६१]:
     M G: -mahimahattvena


[^५६०]:
     J omits: adṛṣṭākārye


[^५५९]:
     J omits: na


[^५५८]:
     M G J: svakulāṃśaṃ nigṛhītvā

सुहृद् भूत्वोपदिसति दृष्टम् । नायम् अदृष्टार्थो ऽष्टकादिवद् उपदेशः । ईदृशि पुरुषे निक्षिप्तस्य न विप्रलयो[^५६३] भवति, एवंविधे न निक्षिप्तम् अनेनेति शङ्का न भवति । यस् तु नग्नकितवपानशौञ्डादिः स केनचिद् आकृष्टो ऽपि मत्पित्रास्य[^५६४] हस्ते निक्षिप्तं मया चेति न शङ्कास्पदम्, सुवर्णादेर् महतो धनस्य निक्षेपधारक इति । काकणी मात्रिकेभियुज्यमाने[^५६५] भवत्य् एव ॥ ८.१७९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

He whose birth and family are well known,—whose forefathers are known to
have been learned, righteous and rich,—who never have recourse to
improper acts, being mindful of the reputation of their family. In fact
such a person is incapable of hearing the slightest blame; and yet it is
such people! that are subject to severest criticism at the hands of the
people.

‘*Vṛtta*’ is *character, conduct*; i.e., being naturally mindful of
public opinion.

‘*Cognisant of the law*’;—who has become acquainted with the true
meaning of Smṛtis, Purāṇas and *Itihāsas* by repeatedly studying them.

‘*Truthful*’—who has found, in all business-relations, to speak in
strict accordance with real facts.

‘*Has a large following*,’—he who is held in high esteem by his friends
and relations, as also by the officers of the king,—and is, as such, not
amenable to be approached by dishonest state-officials.

The ‘*wealthy*’ man avoids the misappropriation of other people’s
property, with a view to safeguard his own possessions, and also through
fear of transcendental results; the idea in his mind being—‘I have
enough wealth of my own, why should I think of the property of others?
If I were detected, I would be punished.’

‘*Honourable*,’ who always acts righteously, or who is of a
straightforward nature.

The nominal affix ‘*ghañ*’ (in the noun ‘*nikṣepa*,’ ‘*deposit*’) has
the force of the passive, and makes the word stand for the gold and
other property that are kept as *deposits*.

‘*Shall entrust*’—Place.

‘*The wise man*’;—the man who entrusts deposits in the said manner is
‘*wise*’; otherwise he becomes a *fool*.

The Author here is ottering an advice in the manner of a friend; and the
advice has no spiritual purpose behind it, as there is in the case of
such acts as the *Aṣṭakā* and the like.

When a ‘deposit’ is placed with such a person, it is never lost; nor is
there any doubt as to who has placed it and with whom. On the other
hand, if a person is a pauper, a notorious cheat or drunkard,—even if he
he dragged up, no one would even believe that a deposit had been placed
with him; when the man is not possessed of a single farthing, how could
it he believed that he would have been entrusted with gold or such large
properties?—(179)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (82b), which explains
‘*mahāpakṣa*’ as one who has a large family;—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 204);—and in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 85), which explains
‘*mahāpakṣa*’ as ‘one having a large family’,—and ‘*nikṣepam*’ as
‘*nikṣepyam*,’ *i*.*e*., the *thing deposited*;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi*
(p. 36), which explains ‘*mahāpakṣa*’ as ‘one who has a large number of
relatives.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (2.1, 2)—‘When a man entrusts any property of his own to
another, in confidence and without suspicion, it is called by the
learned a *Deposit*. A sensible man should make a deposit with one who
belongs to a respectable family and who is virtuous, acquainted with his
duties, veracious, influential, wealthy, and honourable.’

*Bṛhaspasti* (12.2, 4).—‘When any chattel is deposited in the house of
another man, through fear of the King, robbers or other dangers, or for
the purpose of deceiving one’s heirs, it is called a *Deposit*. Let a
man make a deposit, after duly considering the place, house, master of
the house, the power, means, quality, veracity and kindred of the
depositary.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

निक्षेपिलक्षणविध्यर्थः श्लोकः । **कुलजे** प्रकृष्टाभिजने । [**वृत्तसंपन्ने**] आचारवति । प्रकरणाद् अर्थव्यवहारे, इतरत्र वा । एवं चार्थव्यवहारे शुचिर् भवति यदि धर्मज्ञतया **सत्यवादी** भवति । तथा च सति वृत्तविशेषणम् इदं विज्ञेयम् । एवंवृत्तो यदि भवति ततो ऽयं निक्षेपयोग्यः संपद्यते । **महापक्षश्** चागम्यश् चाटविकादीनां भवति, स्वपक्षपराभवभयाच् च न विकारं याति । एवं च धनित्वोपदेशो व्याख्येयः । **आर्यश्** चैवंवृत्तः शूद्रो ऽपि विज्ञेयः, अविक्रियात्मकत्वाद् इति । अन्ये तु द्विजातिम् आचक्षते, तस्य चादृष्टार्थं ग्रहणम् आहुर् इति ॥ ८.१७८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

179	A sensible man should make a deposit (only) with a person of (good) family, of good conduct, well acquainted with the law, veracious, having many relatives, wealthy, and honourable (arya).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/180_yo_yathA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>180 यो यथा ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यो यथा निक्षिपेद् +धस्ते  
यम् अर्थं यस्य मानवः ।  
स तथैव ग्रहीतव्यो  
यथा दायस् तथा ग्रहः  ॥ ८.१८० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/180_yo_yathA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the form in which one shall deposit a thing in the hands of another person, in that same form shall that thing be received back; as the delivery so the recovery.—(180)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**यथेति**, यादृशेन प्रकारेण समुद्रम् अमुद्रं ससाक्षिकम् असाक्षिकम् इत्य् एवमादि, **स** **तथैवेति** । **सो** ऽर्थो निक्षिप्तस् **तथैव ग्रहीतव्यः** । **यथा दायो** दीयते निक्षिप्यते **तथा** गृह्यते । यत्रैतन् निश्चितं भवति सर्वकालम् एवास्य हस्ते स मुद्रयित्वा[^५६६] स्थापयति । तत्र विप्रतिपत्ताव् अमुद्रिते लब्धे धारणको यदि ब्रवीति "नैष मुद्रयति निक्षिप्य मे बलाद् गच्छति" तत्रैवं शङ्कास्पदं जीयते[^५६७] । प्रमाणान्तरात् प्रायशो मुद्रणम् । अन्यदा तु मुद्रानाशे कियद् अपहारितम् इति परिमाणविशेषज्ञानाय प्रमाणान्तरं व्यापारणीयं राज्ञा । अपह्नवाद्[^५६८] एव सामान्यदण्डेन दण्डनीयः । निक्षेपदण्डस् तु द्रव्यपरिमाणे निश्चिते द्वितीयः ।


[^५६८]:
     DK: mudrāpahnavād


[^५६७]:
     J: jīyate


[^५६६]:
     M G DK: samudrayitvā; J: so 'mudrayitvā

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च सर्वापह्नव एव विभावितो जित एव युक्तः । 

<u>सत्यम्</u> । यत्राविनाभावसिद्धम्, यथा मुषिते ग्रामे देवदत्तो ऽभियुज्यते[^५६९] "त्वयान्यैश् चोरैः सहामुष्मिन्न् अहनि स ग्रामो हतः" इति । स आह "नैव तस्मिन्न् अहनि तं ग्रामम् अहम् अगमम्" । तत्र साक्षिभिर् उक्तम् "दृष्टं तस्मिन्न् अहनि तत्र यन् मुष्टं तत् तु न दृष्टम्" । तत्र देवदत्तेन मोषो[^५७०] ऽप्य् अपह्नुतस् तदहर् ग्रामसंनिधानसिद्धेः । स्फुटे च कारणान्तरे संनिधाव् अनुपलभ्यमाने संनिधानादेशदेशाच् चौरत्वम् अपि युक्तम् अनुमातुम् । इह तु प्रमादनष्टानां नराणां मुद्रितनिक्षिप्तम् अमुद्रितम् एव नीयते ।   
**यथा दायस् तथा ग्रहः** । को मे ऽभियोगावसर इत्य् अनया बुद्ध्या संभवत्य् अपह्नवः । न हि शक्नोत्य् अनुमातुम् । यदापि[^५७१] कथंचिद् अनुमापयेत् परिमाणं तु न विना प्रमाणान्तरं निक्षिप्तवचनाद् एव सिध्यतीति युक्तो दिव्यादितो[^५७२] निश्चयः । सर्वथा य एकदेशान्तरेण न संभवति तत्रैवैकदेशपराजित इति निश्चयः ॥ ८.१८० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Yathā*,’—*in the form*; *i.e*., sealed or unsealed, with witnesses or
without witnesses and so forth.

‘*In that same form*’ should the thing be received back; the thing
should be *recovered* in the same form in which it had been *delivered*.

In a case where it is generally known that the party concerned always
keeps deposits properly sealed,—if a dispute arises, and the deposit is
found to be unsealed, if the trustee were to say ‘this man never seals
his deposits, he forces them upon me and goes off,’ he would be
suspected of dishonesty and would lose his case; there being no room for
any other evidence so far;—but when, on the seal being found broken, the
question arises as to what part of the property has been extracted, the
king should call other kinds of evidence; the guilty man however is to
be punished in the first place, with the penalty prescribed for
dishonest dealing in general;—and secondly, another penalty in
connection with the ‘deposit’ has to be imposed after the exact amount
extracted has been determined.

“in the case of a dishonest dealing, the man deserves to be mulcted of
the entire amount involved.”

True; but this is so only in cases where the entire guilt is clearly
indicated by proofs. For instance, a certain village has been robbed,
Devadatta is accused of having colluded with other thieves and robbed
the village on that day,—thereupon he pleads—‘on that day I did not go
to that village,’—witnesses declare that he had been seen in the village
on that day, but it had not been seen that he had actually committed the
robbery,—from this the deduction is that the man having denied the
robbery as well as his presence in the village, since his presence had
been proved, the denial of the robbery also was not true; so that when
there was other evidence clearly proving the man’s presence in the
village, it was safe to infer that he had committed the robbery also.

In the present case however, it may he that the seal was broken through
carelessness (and not necessarily intentionally), (so that the penalty
need not always be severe).

‘*As the delivery so the recovery*,’—*i.e*., what was delivered ‘sealed’
should be received back also ‘sealed.’

Fraudulent denial may be made by a man who might think that there would
be no occasion for his being hauled up. The presence of such fraudulent
intention may be inferred; but the exact amount involved cannot be
determined entirely on the assertion of the depositor, except through
other kinds of evidence. So in such cases the right course would be to
arrive at a decision with the help of ordeals. And (as for the actual
award), it is only where no certainty is possible in regard to the
entire claim that a partial decree is awarded.—(180)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 86), which explains
‘*dāyaḥ*’ as *depositing* and ‘*grahaḥ*’ as *receiving*;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 205), which explains ‘*dāyaḥ*’ as
giving, depositing,—and ‘*grahaḥ*’ as *receiving*;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 113b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkaya* (2.65, 67).—‘If something contained in a basket is made
over in deposit to another person, without the contents being declared,
it is called a *Scaled Deposit*; it shall be restored to the owner in
exactly the same form in which it had ben deposited. This same rule
applies to ordinary deposits also.’

*Nārada* (2.3).—‘In whatever form may a man have delivered any of his
effects to another, in the same form shall that article be restored to
the owner; as the delivery so the recovery.’

*Nārada* (2.5).—‘If one article concealed in another is deposited in
another man’s house, without stating what it is, it is then a *Sealed
Deposit*.’

*Nārada* (2.6).—‘Deposits must he restored in precisely the same
condition.’

*Bṛhaspati* (12.3).—‘When a chattel enclosed in a cover and marked with
a seal is deposited, without describing its nature and quantity, and
without showing it, it is termed a *Sealed Deposit*.’

*Bṛhaspati* (12.9).—‘A deposit must be returned to the very man who
hailed it, in the very manner in which it was hailed.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 662).—‘Purchase-money, what is deposited by
one going on a long journey, a pledge, something handed over for being
delivered to a third party, what is given to another for the making of
something else, what is paid in connection with loan-transactions, all
this is called *Deposit*.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यस्माद् उभयथा निक्षेपो दृष्टः समुद्रो विमुद्रश् च, असाक्षितस् सुसाक्षितश् च, संख्यातो ऽसंख्यातश् च, तस्माद् इदम् उच्यते- **यथा दायस् तथा ग्रहः** । **मानव**ग्रहणाच् चेह विज्ञायते- पूर्वश्लोके **आर्य**ग्रहणं सर्ववर्णार्थम्, न तु द्विजातिविषयम् । एवं च सति दानप्रतिदानयोस् तुल्यक्रिययोर् निक्षेपधारकस्याभियोगो न जायते ॥ ८.१७९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

180	In whatever manner a person shall deposit anything in the hands of another, in the same manner ought the same thing to be received back (by the owner); as the delivery (was, so must be) the re-delivery.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/181_yo_nixepam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>181 यो निक्षेपम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यो निक्षेपं याच्यमानो  
निक्षेप्तुर् न प्रयच्छति ।  
स याच्यः प्राड्विवाकेन  
तन् निक्षेप्तुर् असंनिधौ  ॥ ८.१८१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/181_yo_nixepam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

व्यत्यस्तक्रमो ऽयं श्लोकः समाम्नाये पठ्यते । प्रथमम् अस्यार्धश्लोकं पठित्वा "साक्ष्यभावे" (८.१८२) इति पठितव्यं, ततः "स याच्यः" इति । एवं पाठो युक्तः । तथा ह्य् अर्थसङ्गतिर् भवति । 

साक्ष्यभावाद् दिव्येषु प्राप्तेषु वचनम् इदम् । यथा चर्णादानादिषु साक्ष्यभावसमन्तरम् एव दिव्यानि दीयन्ते न तद्वद् अत्र । किं तर्हि चरैर् अस्य वृत्तम् अनुचारयेत् । तत्र यदि निपुणतश् चार्यमाण्ō न क्वचिद् वृत्ते स्कलति तदा न शपथैर् अर्दनीयः[^५७३] । अथाप्य् अत्र प्रमाद्यति तदा निक्षेपहरणसांभावनापि युक्तैव । तदायं[^५७४] दिव्यैः परिशोधनीयः । न पुनर् अनेकनिक्षेपहरणेनापरनिक्षेपहरणं सिध्यति । कदाचिद् गरीयसा प्रयोजनेनैकम् अपहृत्य कृतप्रयोजन[^५७५] उत्पन्नानुशयो वान्यस्य समर्पयति । अतो ऽयं श्लोकसंघातो झट् इति निक्षेपधारणकस्य शपथनिवृत्यर्थो न पुनः प्रमाणोपन्यासः । न च पाड्विवाकनिक्षेपहरणे राजदण्डवद् अनिश्चितापरनिक्षेपहरणे[^५७६] ऽपि प्रथमाभियोक्तुर् दापयितुं युक्तः । अनिश्चिते हि हरणे दाप्येत यदि शास्त्रेण तदा निर्णयार्थं व्यवहारशास्त्रं स्यात् । ततश् च हेतुभिर् निर्णयः कर्तव्य इति विरुध्यते[^५७७] । तस्मान् न शास्त्रीयो ऽयम् अर्थो[^५७८] न च लौकिकी व्यवस्थेति । **साक्ष्यभाव** इत्याद्युक्तेन प्रकारेणान्यपरतया नेयम्[^५७९] ॥ ८.१८१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

व्यत्यस्तक्रमो ऽयं श्लोकः समाम्नाये पठ्यते । प्रथमम् अस्यार्धश्लोकं पठित्वा "साक्ष्यभावे" (८.१८२) इति पठितव्यं, ततः "स याच्यः" इति । एवं पाठो युक्तः । तथा ह्य् अर्थसङ्गतिर् भवति । 

साक्ष्यभावाद् दिव्येषु प्राप्तेषु वचनम् इदम् । यथा चर्णादानादिषु साक्ष्यभावसमन्तरम् एव दिव्यानि दीयन्ते न तद्वद् अत्र । किं तर्हि चरैर् अस्य वृत्तम् अनुचारयेत् । तत्र यदि निपुणतश् चार्यमाण्ō न क्वचिद् वृत्ते स्कलति तदा न शपथैर् अर्दनीयः[^५७३] । अथाप्य् अत्र प्रमाद्यति तदा निक्षेपहरणसांभावनापि युक्तैव । तदायं[^५७४] दिव्यैः परिशोधनीयः । न पुनर् अनेकनिक्षेपहरणेनापरनिक्षेपहरणं सिध्यति । कदाचिद् गरीयसा प्रयोजनेनैकम् अपहृत्य कृतप्रयोजन[^५७५] उत्पन्नानुशयो वान्यस्य समर्पयति । अतो ऽयं श्लोकसंघातो झट् इति निक्षेपधारणकस्य शपथनिवृत्यर्थो न पुनः प्रमाणोपन्यासः । न च पाड्विवाकनिक्षेपहरणे राजदण्डवद् अनिश्चितापरनिक्षेपहरणे[^५७६] ऽपि प्रथमाभियोक्तुर् दापयितुं युक्तः । अनिश्चिते हि हरणे दाप्येत यदि शास्त्रेण तदा निर्णयार्थं व्यवहारशास्त्रं स्यात् । ततश् च हेतुभिर् निर्णयः कर्तव्य इति विरुध्यते[^५७७] । तस्मान् न शास्त्रीयो ऽयम् अर्थो[^५७८] न च लौकिकी व्यवस्थेति । **साक्ष्यभाव** इत्याद्युक्तेन प्रकारेणान्यपरतया नेयम्[^५७९] ॥ ८.१८१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

व्यत्यस्तक्रमो ऽयं श्लोकः समाम्नाये पठ्यते । प्रथमम् अस्यार्धश्लोकं पठित्वा "साक्ष्यभावे" (८.१८२) इति पठितव्यं, ततः "स याच्यः" इति । एवं पाठो युक्तः । तथा ह्य् अर्थसङ्गतिर् भवति । 

साक्ष्यभावाद् दिव्येषु प्राप्तेषु वचनम् इदम् । यथा चर्णादानादिषु साक्ष्यभावसमन्तरम् एव दिव्यानि दीयन्ते न तद्वद् अत्र । किं तर्हि चरैर् अस्य वृत्तम् अनुचारयेत् । तत्र यदि निपुणतश् चार्यमाण्ō न क्वचिद् वृत्ते स्कलति तदा न शपथैर् अर्दनीयः[^५७३] । अथाप्य् अत्र प्रमाद्यति तदा निक्षेपहरणसांभावनापि युक्तैव । तदायं[^५७४] दिव्यैः परिशोधनीयः । न पुनर् अनेकनिक्षेपहरणेनापरनिक्षेपहरणं सिध्यति । कदाचिद् गरीयसा प्रयोजनेनैकम् अपहृत्य कृतप्रयोजन[^५७५] उत्पन्नानुशयो वान्यस्य समर्पयति । अतो ऽयं श्लोकसंघातो झट् इति निक्षेपधारणकस्य शपथनिवृत्यर्थो न पुनः प्रमाणोपन्यासः । न च पाड्विवाकनिक्षेपहरणे राजदण्डवद् अनिश्चितापरनिक्षेपहरणे[^५७६] ऽपि प्रथमाभियोक्तुर् दापयितुं युक्तः । अनिश्चिते हि हरणे दाप्येत यदि शास्त्रेण तदा निर्णयार्थं व्यवहारशास्त्रं स्यात् । ततश् च हेतुभिर् निर्णयः कर्तव्य इति विरुध्यते[^५७७] । तस्मान् न शास्त्रीयो ऽयम् अर्थो[^५७८] न च लौकिकी व्यवस्थेति । **साक्ष्यभाव** इत्याद्युक्तेन प्रकारेणान्यपरतया नेयम्[^५७९] ॥ ८.१८१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

व्यत्यस्तक्रमो ऽयं श्लोकः समाम्नाये पठ्यते । प्रथमम् अस्यार्धश्लोकं पठित्वा "साक्ष्यभावे" (८.१८२) इति पठितव्यं, ततः "स याच्यः" इति । एवं पाठो युक्तः । तथा ह्य् अर्थसङ्गतिर् भवति । 

साक्ष्यभावाद् दिव्येषु प्राप्तेषु वचनम् इदम् । यथा चर्णादानादिषु साक्ष्यभावसमन्तरम् एव दिव्यानि दीयन्ते न तद्वद् अत्र । किं तर्हि चरैर् अस्य वृत्तम् अनुचारयेत् । तत्र यदि निपुणतश् चार्यमाण्ō न क्वचिद् वृत्ते स्कलति तदा न शपथैर् अर्दनीयः[^५७३] । अथाप्य् अत्र प्रमाद्यति तदा निक्षेपहरणसांभावनापि युक्तैव । तदायं[^५७४] दिव्यैः परिशोधनीयः । न पुनर् अनेकनिक्षेपहरणेनापरनिक्षेपहरणं सिध्यति । कदाचिद् गरीयसा प्रयोजनेनैकम् अपहृत्य कृतप्रयोजन[^५७५] उत्पन्नानुशयो वान्यस्य समर्पयति । अतो ऽयं श्लोकसंघातो झट् इति निक्षेपधारणकस्य शपथनिवृत्यर्थो न पुनः प्रमाणोपन्यासः । न च पाड्विवाकनिक्षेपहरणे राजदण्डवद् अनिश्चितापरनिक्षेपहरणे[^५७६] ऽपि प्रथमाभियोक्तुर् दापयितुं युक्तः । अनिश्चिते हि हरणे दाप्येत यदि शास्त्रेण तदा निर्णयार्थं व्यवहारशास्त्रं स्यात् । ततश् च हेतुभिर् निर्णयः कर्तव्य इति विरुध्यते[^५७७] । तस्मान् न शास्त्रीयो ऽयम् अर्थो[^५७८] न च लौकिकी व्यवस्थेति । **साक्ष्यभाव** इत्याद्युक्तेन प्रकारेणान्यपरतया नेयम्[^५७९] ॥ ८.१८१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

व्यत्यस्तक्रमो ऽयं श्लोकः समाम्नाये पठ्यते । प्रथमम् अस्यार्धश्लोकं पठित्वा "साक्ष्यभावे" (८.१८२) इति पठितव्यं, ततः "स याच्यः" इति । एवं पाठो युक्तः । तथा ह्य् अर्थसङ्गतिर् भवति । 

साक्ष्यभावाद् दिव्येषु प्राप्तेषु वचनम् इदम् । यथा चर्णादानादिषु साक्ष्यभावसमन्तरम् एव दिव्यानि दीयन्ते न तद्वद् अत्र । किं तर्हि चरैर् अस्य वृत्तम् अनुचारयेत् । तत्र यदि निपुणतश् चार्यमाण्ō न क्वचिद् वृत्ते स्कलति तदा न शपथैर् अर्दनीयः[^५७३] । अथाप्य् अत्र प्रमाद्यति तदा निक्षेपहरणसांभावनापि युक्तैव । तदायं[^५७४] दिव्यैः परिशोधनीयः । न पुनर् अनेकनिक्षेपहरणेनापरनिक्षेपहरणं सिध्यति । कदाचिद् गरीयसा प्रयोजनेनैकम् अपहृत्य कृतप्रयोजन[^५७५] उत्पन्नानुशयो वान्यस्य समर्पयति । अतो ऽयं श्लोकसंघातो झट् इति निक्षेपधारणकस्य शपथनिवृत्यर्थो न पुनः प्रमाणोपन्यासः । न च पाड्विवाकनिक्षेपहरणे राजदण्डवद् अनिश्चितापरनिक्षेपहरणे[^५७६] ऽपि प्रथमाभियोक्तुर् दापयितुं युक्तः । अनिश्चिते हि हरणे दाप्येत यदि शास्त्रेण तदा निर्णयार्थं व्यवहारशास्त्रं स्यात् । ततश् च हेतुभिर् निर्णयः कर्तव्य इति विरुध्यते[^५७७] । तस्मान् न शास्त्रीयो ऽयम् अर्थो[^५७८] न च लौकिकी व्यवस्थेति । **साक्ष्यभाव** इत्याद्युक्तेन प्रकारेणान्यपरतया नेयम्[^५७९] ॥ ८.१८१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ऽसाक्ष्यभावे" इत्य् उपरिष्टाद् वक्ष्यति । तेनास्य सामर्थ्यात् संबन्धो द्रष्टव्यः । साक्ष्यभावे **यो निक्षेपं याच्यमानो न प्रयच्छति** ततो निक्षेप्त्रा प्राङ्विवाको विज्ञापि[तः इमं] कुर्यात्- पूर्वनिक्षिप्तस्य परिमाणवयोरूपसादृश्येन कैश्चिद् अपदेशैः केनचिद् हिरण्यादि तस्मिन्न् एव निक्षेपं पूर्वनिक्षेपधारिणि निक्षिपेत् । ततः कस्मिंश्चित् काले गते पूर्वनिक्षे[प्तु]र् **असंनिधौ** प्राङ्विवाको द्वितीयेन निक्षेप्त्रा द्वितीयं निक्षेपं याचयेत् ॥ ८.१८० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

181	He who restores not his deposit to the depositor at his request, may be tried by the judge in the depositor's absence.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/182_sAxy-abhAve_praNidhibhir.md">
<details open><summary><h3>182 साक्ष्य्-अभावे प्रणिधिभिर् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

साक्ष्य्-अभावे प्रणिधिभिर्  
वयो-रूप-समन्वितैः ।  
अपदेशैश् च संन्यस्य  
हिरण्यं तस्य तत्त्वतः  ॥ ८.१८२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/182_sAxy-abhAve_praNidhibhir.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When requested to restore the deposit, if the trustee do not restore it to the depositor,—then, on the departure of that depositor, in the event of there being no witnesses, the judge shall actually deposit gold (with the trustee) through spies of proper age and appearance, under some pretexts, and then ask him to restore it.—(181-182)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पदार्थयोजनाम् इदानीम् उपसरामः । **स याच्यः प्राविवाकेन तन्निक्षेप्तुर् संनिधौ** । येन निक्षेप्त्रा[^५८०] रहसि स्थापितं साक्षिष्व् असत्सु तस्य याचमानस्य धारणको यद्य् अपह्नुते "न त्वया किंचिन् निक्षिप्तम्" इति, ततो निक्षेप्त्रा[^५८१] राजा ज्ञापितो न निक्षेपधारिण आकारं दर्शयेत् । किं तर्हि कुर्यात् । **प्रणिधिभिश्** चारैर् हिरण्यम् आत्मीयं सुवर्णं रूप्यं वान्यस्य **संन्यस्य** निक्षिप्य याचितव्यो ऽर्थनीयः द्वितीयं निक्षेपं प्राड्विवाकेन । प्राड्विवाकग्रहणं निर्णयाधिकृतपुरुषोपलक्षणार्थम् । किं साक्षाद् एव याचितव्यः । नेत्य् आह, प्रणिधीनां मुखेन । यैर् एव न्यस्तं **वयोरूपसमन्वितैः** । वयसा समन्विता[^५८२] येन बाला न भवन्ति, तेषां हि परैः प्रेरितानां मद्वञ्चनार्थो न्यास इति संभाव्यते । परिणतवयोभ्यस् तु नाशङ्का[^५८३] भवति । एवं रूपसमन्वयो व्याख्येयः । रूपम् एव कस्यचित् तादृशं भवति यस्य दर्शनाद् एव चापलं प्रतिभाति । तथा च रूपम् एतद् व्याचष्टे "भगवन् वीतरागताम्" इति । तेनैतद्[^५८४] उक्तं भवति- तादृशाः प्रणिधयः कर्तव्या येषां मद्वञ्चनार्थो ऽयम् उपक्रम इति नाशङ्कते धारणकः । **अपदेशैः** सव्याजैर् निक्षेपकारणैः । राज्ञोपद्रवग्रामगमनादिभि- "अनेन हेतुना त्वयि संप्रति निक्षिपाम्" इत्य् अनृतसंभवात् कारणकथनम् अपदेशः । एतच् च सर्वं प्राङ् निक्षेप्तुर् असंनिधौ कर्तव्यम् ॥ ८.१८२ ॥


[^५८४]:
     M G DK: tenaiva tad


[^५८३]:
     M G: nāśako


[^५८२]:
     M G: vayasāmanvitā


[^५८१]:
     M G DK: nikṣeptā


[^५८०]:
     M G DK place nikṣeptrā after sākṣiṣv asatsu
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 8.181-182)  
**

From what has gone before people might be led to think that in a case
where there are no witnesses, recourse should at once be had to
*ordeals*;—and it is to guard against this that the author adds these
texts.

The meaning is that in the case of non-payment of debt and other
disputes, the judge has recourse to ordeals as soon as it is found that
no witnesses are available;—but this is not what should be done in the
case in question; in such cases the character of the man is tested
through spies. If, on being so tested, it is found that the man does not
trip in his dealings, then he shall not be disgraced With having to
undergo an ordeal. If, on the other hand, he does trip, then it is only
right that he should be suspected of having misappropriated the deposit;
and in this case he should be made to undergo ordeals; because the mere
fact of his having misappropriated one deposit does not necessarily
prove that he had misappropriated another deposit also; for it is just
possible

that on account of some urgent need he might have been led to commit
misappropriation in one case, while in another ease, either by reason of
his needs having been supplied or on account of repentance, he might
have restored it honestly.

The present verses are to be taken as forbidding the course of hurriedly
making the trustee undergo ordeals; and they are meant to point out a
new line of evidence. Then again even though in the case of the man
misappropriating the judge’s deposit, there is immediate punishment, yet
it does not follow that the same punishment shall be inflicted upon him
in connection with the alleged, but uncertain, misappropriation of that
belonging to the plaintiff. For if such penalty were to be inflicted
even in cases of uncertainty, there would be no laws laying down the
means of arriving at *certain* conclusions. Hence it has been considered
necessary that decisions should be arrived at by means of reasonings.

For these reasons verse 181 should not be taken in its literal sense
(that the man *shall be made to pay* ‘*yācyaḥ*’); but it should be
interpreted in a different manner, being construed along with verse 182.

The verbal construction of the verse we explain now as follows:—‘*on the
departure of that depositor*’—by whom the deposit had been placed,—‘he
shall *be asked by the judge to restore it*.’

There being no witnesses,—when the depositor asks for the restoration of
his deposit and the trustee denies the deposit, saying ‘you never
deposited anything with me’—and being appealed to by the depositor, the
king shall not at once put the trustee to the ordeal;—what then shall he
do?—The judge shall deposit his own or some one else’s gold or silver
with the man, through spies, and then ask for its restoration.

The term ‘*judge*,’ here stands for any person who has been deputed by
the king to investigate the ease.

“Is he to be asked directly by the Judge himself?”

No; it should be done through spies,—those same through whom the deposit
has been placed.

‘*Of propet age and appearance*’;—they should he of ‘proper age,’ so
that they may not be minors; for if such minors were to go to transact
business, the man would suspect that they had been put up by others to
cheat him; whereas if they were full-grown people, no such suspicion
would arise.

Similarly they should be of ‘*proper appearance*’;—in the case of some
people their very appearance is indicative of their fickle nature; that
appearance is to be regarded as ‘proper’ which indicates freedom from
love or hatred.

Thus the meaning comes to be that the spies chosen should be such that
the trustee may not suspect that the whole business was a trick to
entrap him.

‘*Under some pretexts*.’—That is, they may say, for instance,—‘The man
who is depositing this good is leaving the city from fear of harrassment
by the king, that is why I am placing this deposit with you.’ This
untrue representation is what is called ‘*pretext*’ here.

All this is to be done, when the original depositor (the original
plaintiff) is not present.—(182)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 8.181-182)**

These verses are quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 664);—and in *Vivādaratnākara*
(p. 94), which explains them to mean that—‘If the person who calls
himself the Depositor demands the deposit from the person called the
Deposit-holder,—and the latter denies it, saying ‘nothing was deposited
with me’,—and there are no witnesses to the transaction;—then the king,
with a desire to ascertain the facts, should have recourse to the
following stratagem:—Through spies of the proper age and appearance,
trustworthy in word and appearance, he should by some pretext deposit
his own gold with the accusal person;—after some days, he should have
that deposit demanded from him.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.181-184)  
**

*Nārada* (2.4, 7).—‘If the depositary fails to restore the deposit to
the depositor as he ought, he shall be compelled by forcible means, to
restore it, after his guilt has been proved by ordeals or other modes of
proof. The wicked man who does not restore a deposit, on being asked to
do so by the depositor, shall be punished by the King. If the deposit
has been lost, he shall make good its value.’

*Bṛhaspati* (12.13).—‘He who, after receiving a deposit, denies the
fact, and is convicted by the evidence of witnesses or ordeal, shall be
compelled to give up the deposit and to pay a fine equal in amount to
the same.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.66).—‘If on the depositor demanding it, the deposit be
not restored, on account of its having been lost, the depositary should
be made to pay to the depositor the value of the deposit, and also a
fine of the same amount.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 664).—‘If after having received a deposit, one
fails to restore it on being asked to do so, he should he punished and
compelled to restore it.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 664).—‘If after having received a deposit,
the depositor refuses to restore it and dishonestly denies the deposit,
he should be arrested and compelled to restore the deposit and also pay
a fine.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यदि तं द्वितीयं निक्षेपं यथा [न्यस्तं प्रतिपद्येत् तदा **न**] **किंचिद्** अस्ति **यत् परैर् अभियुज्यते** ॥ ८.१८१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

182	On failure of witnesses let the (judge) actually deposit gold with that (defendant) under some pretext or other through spies of suitable age and appearance (and afterwards demand it back).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/183_sa_yadi.md">
<details open><summary><h3>183 स यदि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

स यदि प्रतिपद्येत  
यथान्यस्तं यथाकृतम् ।  
न तत्र विद्यते किं चिद्  
यत् परैर् अभियुज्यते  ॥ ८.१८३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/183_sa_yadi.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If he admits the deposit exactly in the form and shape in which it was entrusted,—then there is nothing in the charge brought against him by others.—(183)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**स यदि** निक्षेपधारी यदि **प्रतिपद्येत** "बाढम् अस्ति, गृहाण" इत्य् अङ्गीकृत्य दद्यात् । **यथन्यस्तं** तथा कृतं समुद्रम् अमुद्रं **यथाकृतं** वस्त्रादि संवर्तितम् अमुद्रितम् अन्यद् वा अलंकाराद्यनुपभुक्तं परिमलशून्यं गृहमुद्रया स्वचिह्नेन स्थापितम् । तादृशम् एव चेद् दद्यान् **न तत्र विद्यते किंचित्** सत्यं[^५८५] **यत् परैः** पूर्ववेदिकैर् अभियुज्यते- "एतेनास्माकीनः साक्ष्यभावान् निक्षेपो ऽपह्नूयते" इति । **यथान्यस्तं यथाकृतम्** इति गूढागूढचिह्नकृतेन भेदः । अथ वा गृहीतृनिक्षेप्तृव्यापारभेदेन[^५८६] भेदः । **यथाकृतं** यथागृहीतं निर्विकल्पम् अवलंबं च गृहीतं तथैव प्रतिदात्व्यं प्रतिदाने यत्र कालग्रहणं न क्रियेत[^५८७] इत्य् अर्थः ॥ ८.१८३ ॥


[^५८७]:
     J: kriyata


[^५८६]:
     M G: gṛhītanikṣeptur; DK: gṛhītur nikṣeptur


[^५८५]:
     J: asatyaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The man having been charged with the words—‘This man is refusing to
restore my deposit, because there are no witnesses to it,’—if he admits
it ‘*in the form and shape*,’ etc.—The distinction between ‘form and
shape’ is based upon the deposit hearing or not bearing a secret
seal;—or it may he based upon the action of the Receiver and the
Depositor.

The deposit should be restored as unhesitatingly and quickly as it had
been received;—that is, there should be no delay in the
restoration.—(183)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 664);—and in *Vivādaratnākara*
(p. 94), which continues the explanation (see last note)—‘If the man
admit the deposit and surrender it exactly in the condition in which it
had been deposited—neither more nor less,—then the king should conclude
that the former deposit, the subject-matter of the dispute, had not been
made over to him, and he should be acquitted of the charge brought
against him by the other party’.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.181-184)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.181-182].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अथ प्राड्विवाकविज्ञातं पश्चान् नियो[जितं न दद्यात्] तत उभयं निगृह्य पूर्वं द्वितीयं च दाप्यः ॥ ८.१८२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

183	If the (defendant) restores it in the manner and shape in which it was bailed, there is nothing (of that description) in his hands, for which others accuse him.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/184_teShAn_na.md">
<details open><summary><h3>184 तेषान् न ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

तेषां न दद्याद् यदि तु  
तद् +धिरण्यं यथाविधि ।  
उभौ निगृह्य दाप्यः स्याद्  
इति धर्मस्य धारणा [मेधातिथिपाठः - स निगृह्योभयं दाप्य इति  ॥ ८.१८४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/184_teShAn_na.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If, however, he should not restore that gold to them in the proper manner, he should be forced to restore both; such is the decree of the law.—(184)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^५८८]:
     M G DK: nigṛhya dāpyaḥ syād

**तेषां** प्राड्विवाकप्रयुक्तनिक्षेप्तॄणां **यदि** द्रव्यं निक्षिप्तं **न दद्यात्,** **यथाविधी**ति यथाकृतपदेन व्याख्यातम् । **स** धारणको ऽवष्टब्धय[^५८९] राजपुरुषैर् **उभयम्** अर्थिनो[^५९०] राजनिक्षेपं च दाप्यः । **इति धर्मस्य धारणा** व्यवस्था । तात्पर्यम् अत्र व्याख्यातम् ॥ ८.१८४ ॥


[^५९०]:
     M G: arthine


[^५८९]:
     M G: 'vaṣṭabdhasya
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*To them*’—*i.e*., to the depositors employed by the Judge;—if he
should not restore ‘*that gold*’—which was placed in deposit;—‘*in the
proper manner*,’—this is exactly what has been spoken of in the
preceding verse by the phrase ‘*in the form in which it was
entrusted*’;—then ‘*he*’—the Receiver—‘*shall be forced*’— by the
officers of the King—‘to *restore both*’—the deposit of the plaintiff,
as also that of the King.

‘*Such is the decree*’—declaration—‘*of the law*.’

What this means has already been explained.—(184)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 664), which explains the meaning
to be that the man should be punished by being made to surrender the two
deposits as also their values.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 94) which explains the meaning to
be as follows—“If, however, the man does not surrender the gold
deposited by the king’s spies, then the king should regard the charge as
proved against him and should make him surrender also the former
deposit, the subject-matter of the former charge.”

It is quoted also in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 209), to the
effect that if, relying on his power, the depository does not surrender
the deposit, he should be punished by the king and forced to deliver it.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.181-184)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.181-182].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पूर्वेणास्य संबन्धः । तथा चोक्तं "यो निक्षेपं याच्यमानः" इत्य् एवमादि ॥ ८.१८३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

184	But if he restores not that gold, as be ought, to those (spies), then he shall be compelled by force to restore both (deposits); that is a settled rule of law.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/185_nixepopanidhI_nityam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>185 निक्षेपोपनिधी नित्यम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

निक्षेपोपनिधी नित्यं  
न देयौ प्रत्यनन्तरे ।  
नश्यतो विनिपाते ताव्  
अनिपाते त्व् अनाशिनौ  ॥ ८.१८५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/185_nixepopanidhI_nityam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Deposits, open and sealed, should never be handed over to the next-of-kin; in the event of a mishap occurring, they become lost; though they do not become lost, if no mishap occurs.—(185)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**प्रत्यनन्तरे**[^५९१] उत्पत्त्यनन्तर[^५९२] उच्यते निक्षेप्तुः पुत्रो भ्राता भार्या वा, यस्य निक्षेप्तुर् द्रव्ये स्वाम्यम् अस्ति — भार्यायास् तावत् स्वाम्यम् उक्तम् एव,[^५९३] पुत्रस्यापि पैतामहे भ्रातुश् चैकधनस्य । तत्र तेषां कश्चिद् याचेन् निक्षेप्तर्य्[^५९४] असंनिहिते "देहि नो ऽस्माकीनम् एतत्" इति । तत्र कश्चिद् अनया बुद्ध्या दद्यात् "साधारणम् एतद् एकेन निक्षिप्तम् अपरेण नीतम् इति को दोषः" इति । अत उच्यते- **न देयौ निक्षेपोपनिधी प्रयनन्तरे** । अर्थवादं[^५९५] हेतुसरूपम् आह- **नश्यतो विनिपाते तौ** । **विनिपातो** ऽन्यथात्वम् प्रत्यनन्तरस्य देशान्तरगमनादि[^५९६] । तस्मिन्न् अस्ति तौ हीयेते । यदि तेन नीत्वा निक्षेप्तुर्[^५९७] न दत्तं तदा तेन पर्यनुयुक्तस्य धारण्यकस्य किम् उत्तरम् । "त्वदीयेन भ्रात्रैतद् धनं साधारणस्वामिना नीतम्" इति नैतद् उत्तरम् । "यथा दायस् तथा ग्रहः" (म्ध् ८.१८०) इत्य् उक्तम् । येनैव निक्षिप्तं स्वामिनास्वामिना वा तस्मा एव देयं तस्यैवायं प्रपञ्चः । यदि तु प्रत्यनन्तरो विक्रियां न गच्छेत् तदा तद्दाने ऽपि न दोषः । तद् आह** अनिपाते त्व् अनाशिनौ** । तत्र ह्य् अस्त्य् उत्तरं मानशत्[^५९८] तस्माद् अर्पयामि । प्रत्यनन्तरेण नीते विनिपाते च तस्य निक्षेप्त्रे याचमानाय[^५९९] स्वधनं दातव्यम् इति श्लोकार्थः ॥ ८.१८५ ॥


[^५९९]:
     M G: nikṣeptṛyācamānāya


[^५९८]:
     DK (1: 740): ānāyya


[^५९७]:
     M G: nikṣeptuṃ


[^५९६]:
     J: deśāntare


[^५९५]:
     J: atraivārthavādaṃ


[^५९४]:
     M G: yāvan nikṣeptary; J: yācate kṣeptary


[^५९३]:
     See commentary on MDh 8.163.


[^५९२]:
     J omits: utpattyanantara


[^५९१]:
     M G omit: pratyanantare
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Next-of-kin*,’—of the depositor; *i.e*., his son, or brother, or wife.
If the depositor has the right of ownership, so has his wife also; the
son also has a right over the property of his grandfather; and the
brother also, who is still united in property, has a right over it.
Hence, if the depositor happens to be sent, any one of these relatives
may tell the depository—‘give the deposit to me, it belongs to me’;—on
this the depository may hand it over to him thinking—‘this is their
joint property, one has deposited it and another is taking it away, what
harm is there in this?’—and it is with a view to guard against this that
the text says—‘*Deposits, open or sealed, shall not be handed over to
the next-of-kin*.’

A hortatory argument is added—‘*In the event of a mishap occurring, they
become los* t,’—‘*mishap*’ in the form of the kinsman going out of the
country and so forth,—if any such happens ‘*they become lost*.’ If the
kinsman, having received the deposit, did not make it over to the person
who had deposited it, then, on being charged by the latter, what answer
could the depositary give? It would be no answer to say—‘it was taken
away by your brother, who was the joint owner of it’; because it has
been declared—‘as the delivery so the recovery’ (180); so that the
deposit should be restored to the person who actually deposited it, be
he the rightful owner or not. This is the simple fact that is set forth
in this detail.

If however nothing happens to the ‘next-of-kin’ then there would be no
harm in restoring the deposit to him; this is what is meant by the
assertion.—‘*They do not become lost, if no mishap occurs*.’ Because in
this case the answer of the depositary would be—‘I restored it to him as
otherwise it might become lost with me.’

What the text means is that—‘if the deposit has been taken away by the
depositor’s kinsman, then, on being asked by the depositor to restore
it, the depositary shall make it good out of his own property.’—(185)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 87), which adds the
following explanation:—If the depositor is living, deposits, sealed or
open, should never be given by the depository to any such near relative
of the depositor as may have a share in the property,—during the absence
of the depositor himself; for if the said relative happen to die, the
deposits become lost, *i.e*., they do not reach the depositor himself;
though if the relative does not die, they may perhaps reach him. So that
in the event of the relative’s death, it would be open to the original
depositor to demand from the depository the value of the deposits; and
in order to guard against this, the depository should always return the
deposits to the depositor himself, while he lives.

It is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (83a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bṛhaspati* (12.9).—‘A deposit must he restored to the very man who kept
it, in the very manner in which it was delivered; it must not be
restored to the next of kin (of the depositor).’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

निक्षेप्तरि जीवति तत्**प्रत्यनन्तरे** पुत्रे भ्रातरि वा तदीयधनार्हे **निक्षेपोपनिधी न देयौ**, प्रार्थयमानाय । येन न प्रत्यनन्तरस्याविनाशे ऽस्ति गतिः । प्रत्यनन्तरस्य विनाशे तु निक्षेपधारी निक्षेप्त्रा याचितः किम् उत्तरं दास्यति तस्य । यतो न तस्य प्रत्यनन्तरदानं युक्तम् ॥ ८.१८४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

185	An open or a sealed deposit must never be returned to a near relative (of the depositor during the latter's lifetime); for if (the recipient) dies (without delivering them), they are lost, but if he does not die, they are not lost.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/186_svayam_eva.md">
<details open><summary><h3>186 स्वयम् एव ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

स्वयम् एव तु यौ दद्यान्  
मृतस्य प्रत्यनन्तरे ।  
न स राज्ञाभियोक्तव्यो  
न निक्षेप्तुश् च बन्धुभिः  ॥ ८.१८६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/186_svayam_eva.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the man restores it himself to the next-of-kin of the deceased depositor,—he should not be harassed by the king, or by the depositor’s relatives.—(186)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^६००]:
     M G DK: rājñā niyoktavyo

जीवतस् तस्मान् निक्षेप्तुः **प्रत्यनन्तर**दानं नास्तीत्य् उक्तम् । **मृतस्य** तु यस् तद् धनम् अस्तीत्य् अविजानते स्वयं दद्यान् न स व्यवहारलेखनादिक्लेशनीयो ऽन्यद् अप्य् अस्ति न वेद वेति । यदि तस्याभविष्यद् अधिकम् इदम् इव तद् अप्य् अदास्यद्[^६०१] इति न क्लिश्यते । अत्राप्य् आशङ्का यदि न निवर्तेत "महाधनो ऽसाव् अभून् न चान्येन समं प्रयुज्यते,[^६०२]" प्रमाणान्तरं निश्चयाय विचारणीयम् । विषाग्न्यादिभिः शपथैर् नार्दनीयः । घटकोशसत्यतण्डुलास् तु न विरुध्यन्ते । न हि ते अतिक्लेशकराः । "साक्ष्यभावे" (म्ध् ८.१८२) इत्य् अत्र द्वितीयो न्यासः । यश् च तयोर् न्यासः स इहापि द्रष्टव्यः ॥ ८.१८६ ॥


[^६०२]:
     M G DK: bhujyate


[^६०१]:
     M G: adāsyam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been just declared that while the depositor is still alive, the
deposit shall not be handed over to his ‘next-of-kin.’ But when he is
dead, if the depositary should himself restore the property to his heir,
who does not know that it belongs to him, then he shall not be made to
undergo the trouble of a law-suit and all that follows in its wake.

If there be a suspicion that there may he something more with the
man,—on the ground that the deceased was a wealthy man and he did not
keep his property with any other person,—then other kinds of evidence
shall be considered, but the man shall not be harassed with oaths or
ordeals with poison, etc.; though there would he nothing wrong in the
employment of such test as the ‘*ghaṭakośa*,’ the ‘*satyataṇḍula*’ and
so forth (which are not so humiliating).

The condition of ‘*the absence of witnesses*’ (mentioned in 182-183)
should be taken as applicable here also.—(186)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 87), whieh adds the
following explanation:—On the death of the depositor, if the depository
deliver the deposit to the depositor’s heir, he should not be blamed
either by the king or by the dead man’s relatives. The term
‘*svayameva*’ implies that during the depositor’s life-time, he should
not deliver it to the heir, even though asked to do so by the
latter;—and that on his death he should give it to the heir even without
being asked to do so;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 37).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (11.10).—‘The depositor being dead, if the depositary restores
the deposit to his next of kin of his own accord, he must not be
harassed, either by the King or by the relations of the depositor.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अविदितनिक्षेपं स्वयं प्रयच्छतो नास्त्य् अभियोगः । अथ तूद्भावकः कश्चिद् अत्रार्थं दर्षयेद् (?) अधिकम्, ततः— ॥ ८.१८५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

186	But (a depositary) who of his own accord returns them to a near relative of a deceased (depositor), must not be harassed (about them) by the king or by the depositor's relatives.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/187_achChalenaiva_chA-nvichChet.md">
<details open><summary><h3>187 अच्छलेनैव चाऽन्विच्छेत् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अच्छलेनैव चाऽन्विच्छेत्  
तम् अर्थं प्रीतिपूर्वकम् ।  
विचार्य तस्य वा वृत्तं  
साम्नैव परिसाधयेत्  ॥ ८.१८७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/187_achChalenaiva_chA-nvichChet.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In doubtful cases he should try to obtain it without artifice and in a friendly manner; or having ascertained his character, he should settle the matter by gentle means.—(187)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

(This verse, as also the *Bhāṣya* on it is wanting in *Mandalik, S, N
and I. O*.)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“According to Nārāyaṇa, the verse refers to cases where one believes a
deposit to be with another but has not made it over himself; according
to Govindarāja and Kullūka, to cases where there may be error.
Govindarāja and Kullūka think that the person who should act in the
manner described is the king, and they explain ‘*anvicchet* by ‘he
should decide.’ Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda, on the other hand, think that
the depositor should act thus.”—Buhler.

This verse has been omitted entirely by Medhātithi; neither the verse
nor its commentary is found in the Mss.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 94), according to which
the verse refers to what the depositors should do; it means that ‘the
depository should keep the deposit honestly and lovingly; all the more
so if the depositor is found to be a man of thoroughly good character.’

It is also quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 209), which says
that this lays down what should be done by the successor of the
depositor, if the depository does not of his own accord, surrender the
deposit, after the depositor’s death.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bṛhaspati* (12.14).—‘When a dispute arises with regard to a deposit
privately made, the performance of an ordeal is ordained for both
parties, to establish the facts of the case.’

*Nārada* (2.11).—‘The rightful owner shall try to recover the deposit
amicably, without resorting to stratagems. Or, he shall explore the
depositary’s mode of living and cause him to restore it by friendly
expostulations.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अविदितं स्वयं प्रयच्छतो यदि तद्गतः कश्चित् कर्णेजपात् संशयः स्यात्, तत **अच्छलेनैव** तस्य **वृत्तिं विचार्य**, तदधिगमो विज्ञेयः, निक्षेपधारिणा प्रज्ञाय ॥ ८.१८६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

187	And (in doubtful cases) he should try to obtain that object by friendly means, without (having recourse to) artifice, or having inquired into (depositary's) conduct, he should settle (the matter) with gentle means.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/188_nixepeShv_eShu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>188 निक्षेपेष्व् एषु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

निक्षेपेष्व् एषु सर्वेषु  
विधिः स्यात् परिसाधने ।  
स-मुद्रे नाप्नुयात् किं चिद्  
यदि तस्मान् न संहरेत्  ॥ ८.१८८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/188_nixepeShv_eShu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of all deposits, such should be the method of restoration; but in the case of a sealed deposit, he should incur nothing, if he does not extract anything from it.—(188)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**निक्षेपेषू**पचयमनेष्व् अनन्तरोक्तो **विधिः** "साक्ष्यभावे" (म्ध् ८.१८२) इत्यादिः परिसाधनार्थो[^६०४] विज्ञेयः । **समुद्रे** निक्षेपे ऽन्यद् अप्य् अस्मिन् भाण्डे द्रव्यम् अभून् नाशितं कृमिभिर् इत्यादिकं पर्यनुयोगं नाप्नुयान् निक्षेपधारी तत्र धारणकस्य । एवं मूषकादिनाशे द्रष्टव्यम् । यदि दारुमये भाण्डे वस्त्रादि स्थापितम् तीक्ष्णदशनैर् मूषकैर् दारु भित्वा भक्ष्येत न निक्षेपधारिणो दोषः । तत्रापि वासनपरिवेष्टितः स्थूलपोट्टलको मुद्रितो यदि निक्षिप्येत यत् तदीये दारुभाण्डे नैव माति[^६०५] तदा बहिर् मूषकादिभक्षिते ऽपि हि न दोषः । यदि चैतन् निक्षेप्तुर् ज्ञानं भवति, धारकेण परिभाषीतं न मम भाण्डम् अन्यद् अस्ति, चरित्रज्ञो वास्य निक्षेप्ता कदाचित् प्रत्यासन्नो भवति ॥ ८.१८७–८८ ॥


[^६०५]:
M G: mānti


[^६०४]:
M G: paramasādhanārtho
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the case of open deposits ‘*the method of restoration*’ shall be as
just described in [verses 182 *et
seq*.]

The depositary shall not incur the censure of the debtor, as regards the
deposit to be restored.

This same rule should be applicable to the case where the article
deposited has been destroyed by rats, etc. For instance, the article
deposited having been wrapped up in a piece of cloth and placed in a
wooden vessel, if rats, with their sharp teeth, should cut through the
wood and devour the article,—it is no fault of the depositary’s. Then
again, if the article is deposited in the form of a bundle sealed in a
basket,—on account of its being such as cannot be contained in a wooden
box,—then also if it is eaten by rats, it is no fault of the
depositary’s. This is specially so, if it is known to the depositor, who
has been informed by the depositary that he possesses no wooden box
(where the article would be safe from rats, etc.),—or if the depositor
knows the man’s character and is close by (and hence is in a position to
know that the article has been really damaged by rats).—(188).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The second half of this verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 86),
which adds the explanation that if the deposit has been handed over to
the depository *sealed*,—then, unless the latter extracts anything from
it, he shall incur no blame; but if he does extract anything, then he
certainly becomes open to censure. In the case of an unsealed deposition
the other hand, even though he may have extracted something, if he
delivers it before the depositor, he does not incur blame.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (2.14, 15).—‘The same law applies in the case of *Yācita*,
*Anvāhita*, and other forms of deposits, also in those of articles made
over to artisans, as also *Nyāsa* and *Pratinyāsa* deposits; if a man
takes charge of a wealthy boy, the law applicable in this case also is
the same.’

*Bṛhaspati* (12.15).—‘The same set of rules applies in the case of a
bailment for delivery to a third party, a loan for use, an article made
over to an artisan, a pledge and a person offering himself for
protection.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.67).—‘The same law applies to the other forms of
deposit- the *Yācita*, the *Anvāhita*, the *Nyāsa* and the *Nikṣepa*.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

तदीयं द्रव्यं रूपतः परिमाणतश् च **समुद्र** एव निक्षेपो धारयितव्यः । न च समुद्रो निक्षेपः प्रत्यर्पित इत्य् एतावता निक्षेपधारी मुच्यते, यदि तस्मान् न किंचित् संहरति प्र[ति]मुद्राकरणेनापस्रावणादिना वान्[येन्]ओपायेन । अपरे ऽपि वर्णयन्ति समुद्रयानरूढानां निक्षेपधारी यानव्यापत्तौ सति यदि किंचिद् आत्मीयं न संहरत्य् अर्थं नाभियोज्यो भवति निक्षेप्तुः । एतद् उक्तं भवति । परित्यज्यात्मीयं निक्षेपरक्षणे यत्नः करणीय इति ॥ ८.१८७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

188	Such is the rule for obtaining back all those open deposits; in the case of a sealed deposit (the depositary) shall incur no (censure), unless he has taken out something.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/189_chaurair_hRtam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>189 चौरैर् हृतम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

चौरैर् हृतं जलेनोढम्  
अग्निना दग्धम् एव वा ।  
न दद्याद् यदि तस्मात् स  
न संहरति किं चन  ॥ ८.१८९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/189_chaurair_hRtam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The depositary shall not hake good what has been stolen by thieves, or carried away by water, or burnt,—if he does not extract anything from it.—(189)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**चौरास्** तु वेदिता अवेदिता वा सुरङ्गभिदादिना यदि मुष्णीयुः, कृतरक्षासंविधाने धारणिके स्वामिन एव नाशः । **जलेनोढम्** उदकेन देशान्तरं नीतम् ॥ ८.१८९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If thieves, known or unknown, should bore a hole through the wall and
take away the artiole,—in spite of the depositary having taken all due
care for its protection,—then the loss falls upon the owner (depositor).

‘*Carried away by water*’—*i.e*., moved away from its place of keeping,
to some other place.—(189)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka*, (p. 663), which adds that if out of
the property, the man extracts not even a small part (then he shall not
have to make it good);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 88), which also adds—‘if
out of the deposited property, the depository does not extract, take
out, anything;’—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 206), which adds—‘if
he extract even the smallest part of the deposit, then he shall have to
make it good;’—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 37), which says that in a
case where the deposit-holder takes for himself a portion of the deposit
and keeps the remainder secretly in some other place with a view to
evade the return of the trust,—then he is to be made to refund the
entire deposit.

It is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (p. 83 a), which explains ‘*tasmāt na
saṃharati*’ as ‘does not take for himself any part of the deposit.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.66).—‘The depositary should not be made to pay
anything, if the deposit has been taken away by the King, or by
accidents or by thieves. When the depositor asks for it, if it is not
restored, and is found to be lost, the depositary shall be made to pay
its value and also a fine equal to it.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 663).—‘Where a deposit has been destroyed by
anarchy or by accidents, it is held to have been lost to the depositor.’

*Nārada* (2.12).—‘If the deposit has been stolen by thieves, carried
away by water, or burnt by fire, it need not he restored, unless the
depositary should have appropriated some portion of it.’

*Nārada* (2.9).—‘If a deposit is lost, together with the property of the
depositary, the loss shall he the depositor’s. The same rule shall
obtain if the loss has been caused by accidents or by the King; unless
the depositary shall have acted fraudulently.’

Do. (2.8).—‘If the depositary derives profit from a deposit, by using it
without the consent of the depositor, he shall be fined, and shall
restore the profit with interest, to the depositor.’

*Bṛhaspati* (12.10-12).—‘When a deposit is destroyed, together with the
goods of the depositary, by the act of God or of the King, the
depositary is not to blame. If the depositary should suffer the deposit
to be destroyed by his want of care or indifference, or should refuse to
restore it on being asked for it, he shall he made to pay the value of
it with interest. Should the depositary secure any advantage for himself
through the article deposited with him, he shall be fined by the King
and compelled to pay its value with the interest.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 663).—‘If the deposit has been destroyed by
the fault of some one, that person should be made to pay the value of
the deposit along with interest.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

चोरादिभ्यो ऽपि नाशे ऽयम् एव समुद्रयानविधिर् व्याख्यात इति । यतः पूर्व एव श्लोकार्थो ज्यायान् ॥ ८.१८८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

189	(A deposit) which has been stolen by thieves or washed away by water or burned by fire, (the bailee) shall not make it good, unless he took part of it (for himself).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/190_nixepasyA-pahartAram_anixeptAram.md">
<details open><summary><h3>190 निक्षेपस्याऽपहर्तारम् अनिक्षेप्तारम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

निक्षेपस्याऽपहर्तारम्  
अनिक्षेप्तारम् एव च ।  
सर्वैर् उपायैर् अन्विच्छेच्  
छपथैश् चैव वैदिकैः  ॥ ८.१९० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/190_nixepasyA-pahartAram_anixeptAram.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The appropriator of a deposit, as also one who has not deposited anything (and yet asks for it),—the king shall test by all methods, as also by means of oaths and ordeals prescribed in the scriptures.—(190)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

हरति यो निक्षिप्तअम् असाक्षिकम्, यो ऽप्य् अनिक्षिप्य[^६०६] नीत्वा वा याचते तम् **अन्विच्छेत्** । अन्वेषणा तत्त्वपरिज्ञाने यत्नः सर्वप्रमाणव्यापारेण । **उपायाः** प्रमाणानि[^६०७] सामादयो वा । तेन चलितवृत्तस्याप्रतिपाद्यमानस्य ताडनबन्धनाद्य् अपि महति धने चोरवत् तत्त्वप्रतिपत्त्यर्थं प्रयोज्यम् । न तत्त्वानिश्चये निग्रहः । **वैदिक**ग्रहणं स्तुत्यर्थम् ॥ ८.१९० ॥


[^६०७]:
     M G: pramāṇā na


[^६०६]:
     M G J: apanīya
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

He who appropriates the deposit placed with him, in the absence of
witnesses, and he who, having received it back, asks for it again,—both
these the king shall ‘*test*’;—‘*testing*’ stands for *trying to find
out the truth*,—by employing ‘*all methods*’;—‘*methods*’ stands for
*proofs*. So that if the man is found to have fallen from the path of
rectitude and denies the deposit,—then recourse may he had to heating
and imprisonment also; specially when the property involved is a large
one, the same methods have to be employed as in the case of thieves. But
no punishment shall lte inflicted if there is uncertainty in the matter.

The epithet ‘*prescribed in the scriptures*’ has been added only by way
of praise of the means to be employed.—(190)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Sārvaiḥ upāyaiḥ*’—‘All kinds of evidence, the four expedients of
kindness and the rest, and also in the case of wicked people, beating
and imprisoning’ (Medhātithi, who is not rightly represented by
Buhler);—‘the four expedients of kindness and so forth’ (Govindarāja,
Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘spies and the like’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 208), as laying
down punishment for the depositor and depository if proved to be
dishonest;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*, (84a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 113a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.190-192)**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.66).—(See under 189.)

Do. (2.67).—‘If the depositary derives, by his own will, an advantage
from the deposit, he shall he made to pay to the depositor what he may
have gained, along with interest, and should also he lined.’

*Nārada* (2.7).—‘The wicked man who does not restore a deposit, on being
asked by the depositor to do so, shall be punished by the King. If the
deposit has been lost or destroyed, he shall make good its value.’

Do. (2.13).—‘He who fails to restore a deposit, and he who demands what
he never deposited, shall both be punished like thieves, and shall be
made to pay a sum equal in amount to the value of the deposit in
question.’

*Bṛhaspati* (12.11).—(See under 189.)

Do. (12.13).—‘He who, after receiving the deposit, denies the fact and
is convicted by the evidence of witnesses or ordeal, shall be compelled
to give up the deposit and to pay an equal amount as fine.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 73).—‘He who enjoys a sealed deposit should pay for
such use, in accordance with place and time; also a line of 12 *Paṇas*.
If the deposit becomes lost or damaged by such use, he shall bear the
cost of the article deposited, and also pay a fine of 21 *Paṇas'*
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यस् त्व् अपदेशाद् विना निक्षिप्तं याच्यमानो निक्षेप्त्रे न दद्यात्- असाक्षिके निक्षेप एतद् उच्यते । निक्षेप्ता वा गृहीत्वा पुनर् याचेत, अदत्वा वा । स राज्ञा प्राङ्विवाकेन वा सामादिभिः सर्वोपायैर् अन्वेष्य, तदसंभवे तु **शपथैश् चैव वैदिकैः** अग्निहरणादिभिः । **च**शब्दाल् लौकिका अपि कोशपानादयो ऽत्रानुरुध्यन्ते । कार्यसामान्याच् च निक्षेपविधेर् अन्यत्राप्य् एषाम् अप्रतिषेधः ॥ ८.१८९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

190	Him who appropriates a deposit and him (who asks for it) without having made it, (the judge) shall try by all (sorts of) means, and by the oaths prescribed in the Veda.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/191_yo_nixepam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>191 यो निक्षेपम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यो निक्षेपं नाऽर्पयति  
यश् चाऽनिक्षिप्य याचते ।  
ताव् उभौ चौरवच् छास्यौ  
दाप्यौ वा तत्समं दमम्  ॥ ८.१९१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/191_yo_nixepam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who does not restore a deposit, and he who, without having made any deposit, asks for it,—both of these should be punished like thieves, or be made to pay a fine equal in value.—(191)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

निक्षिप्तम् अपह्नुवानस्य अनिक्षिप्तं[^६०८] याचमानस्य च[^६०९] दण्डो ऽयम् । यावति धने मिथ्या प्रवर्तते तावद् दण्ड्यते ॥ ८.१९१ ॥


[^६०९]:
     M G DK (1: 743) omit: ca


[^६०८]:
     M G: nikṣipta-
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse prescribes the punishment for one who denies what has been
deposited with him, and also for him who demands what was never
deposited. The man is to be fined that amount which would be the value
of the article in regard to which the fraud is committed.—(191)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 663);—and in *Vivādaratnākara*
(p. 91), which adds the following explanation:—The depository, who, even
when asked to do so, does not surrender the deposit,—or the other party
who demands the deposit, without having delivered it,—both of these
should be punished like a thief, if the property involved is a large
one; but if it is a small one, then they have to be fined the value of
the deposit in question, and the depository is to be forced to surrender
the deposit also.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha*, (p. 84);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 208);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 89), which notes that in
the same text the Matsyapurāṇa reads ‘*dviguṇam damam*’; it says that
Manu’s rule is meant for cases where the persons concerned are poor and
well-behaved;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (83b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 113a), whieh explains ‘*śāsyau*’ as ‘should be punished and
fined.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.190-192)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.190].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पूर्वव्यतिक्रमकारिणो दण्डार्थो ऽयम् आरम्भः विकल्पेन । तथा ब्राह्मणं तु — ॥ ८.१९० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

191	He who does not return a deposit and he who demands what he never bailed shall both be punished like thieves, or be compelled to pay a fine equal (to the value of the object retained or claimed).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/192_nixepasyA-pahartAran_tatsamam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>192 निक्षेपस्याऽपहर्तारन् तत्समम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

निक्षेपस्याऽपहर्तारं  
तत्समं दापयेद् दमम् ।  
तथोपनिधिहर्तारम्  
अविशेषेण पार्थिवः  ॥ ८.१९२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/192_nixepasyA-pahartAran_tatsamam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In all cases the king shall make the appropriator of a deposit pay a fine equal in value to it; also the appropriator of a friendly loan.—(192)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

चोरवच् छिष्टिः पूर्वेणोक्ता । तया च शरीरनिग्रहस् तत्समधनं वैकल्पिके[^६१०] जातिभेदेन ब्राह्मणाद् अन्यत्र प्रदेश उक्तो ऽनेन निवर्त्यते । पुनर् विधानेन चोरवच्छिष्टिर् वाग्दण्डधिग्दण्डादिरूपैव समुच्चीयते धनदण्डेन नाङ्गच्छेदादिरूपा । न च ब्राह्मणस्यापि वैकल्पिके पूर्वेण शारीरदण्डे प्राप्ते तन्निवृत्त्यर्थं पुनर्वचनम् युक्तम्, सामान्येन ब्राह्मणस्य शरीरदण्डप्रतिषेधात्- "न जातु ब्राह्मणं हन्यात्" (म्ध् ८.३८०) इति । 


[^६१०]:
     DK: tatsamadhanavaikalpiko

**उपनिधिः** प्रीत्या यद् भुज्यते । **अविशेषेण** द्रव्यं जातिं च नापेक्षेत[^६११] । 



[^६११]:
     M G DK: dravyajātir nigrāhyā jātiṃ ca nāpekṣate

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्यैस् तूपनिधिः परिभाषितः । 

<u>स तत्रैव</u> नेह । परिभाषाया अकरणाल् लौकिकार्थ एव ग्रहीतुं न्याय्यः । वक्ष्यति च "प्रीत्योपनिहितस्य च" (म्ध् ८.१९६) इति ॥ ८.१९२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The preceding verse has laid down the punishment to be like that of the
thief; under that rule there are two alternatives—corporeal punishment
and fine equal in value to the property involved—to he determined
according to the caste of the accused. So that in the case of castes
other than the Brāhmaṇa, it would, under the said rule, he open to the
king to inflict either of the two forms of punishment. And it is this
possibility that is precluded by the present verse, which restricts the
punishment to *fine* only; so that from among the penalties inflicted on
thieves, what may be added to the *fine* is only *admonition* or
*reprimand*, and not *mutilation* and other corporeal punishments.

It will not be right to take the present verse as precluding corporeal
punishment from the case of Brāhmaṇas, who also would be subject to both
kinds of alternative punishments sanctioned by the preceding verse.
Because corporeal punishment has been already generally prohibited in
the case of Brāhmaṇas;—in such texts as ‘one shall not strike a
Brāhmaṇa’ (8.380).

‘*Upanidhi*’ here stands for what is used through friendship.

‘*In all cases*,’—*i.e*., irrespectively of the nature of the property
or the caste of the person involved.

Others have given a technical meaning to the term ‘*upanidhi*’; but that
meaning is applicable elsewhere, not here. Because, in the absence of
any convention, fixing the technical sense of a term, the right course
is to take it in its ordinary sense. This same ‘*upanidhi*’ is going to
be mentioned again as ‘*friendly loan*’ (under 196).—(192)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse appears to be a mere repetition of 191. According to
Medhātithi, 191 lays down two alternative punishments—corporal
punishment (thief’s penalty) and fine; and 192 excludes the ‘thief’s
punishment’ by specifying the fine only. He repudiates the explanation
that has been attributed to him by Hopkins—*viz*., 192 is for the sake
of freeing the *Brāhmaṇa* from the corporal punishment prescribed in
191. Nor is there anything in Medhātithi to show that he takes 192 as
referring to fresh offences,—a view that has been attributed to him by
Buhler.—Both these views are found in Kullūka.

‘*Upanidhi*’—‘Sealed deposit’ (Kullūka);—‘something lent in a friendly
spirit’ (Medhātithi, who repudiates, in the present context, the
technical meaning of ‘sealed deposit.’)

‘*Aviśeṣeṇa*’—‘Irrespective of the character of the property or the
caste of the person’ (Medhātithi);—‘irrespective of caste’ (Nārāyaṇa and
Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 92), which adds the
following explanation:—The reiteration of ‘fine equal in value to the
deposit’ here—to the exclusion of the ‘thiefs penalty,’ with which it
has been coupled in the preceding verse,—should be understood as meant
for the case where the misappropriator of the deposit is a Brāhmaṇa. The
terms ‘*tathā*’ and ‘*aviśeṣeṇa*’ mean that all that has been said in
regard to the misappropration of the deposit, should he understood to be
applicable to that of the *Upanidhi* also,—the misappropriation of both
standing on the same footing.

It is quoted also in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 85);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(83b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 113a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.190-192)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.190].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **निक्षेपस्यापहर्तारं तत्समं दापयेद् दमम् ।**

चोरदण्डनिवृत्त्यर्थं ब्राह्मणस्येदं पुनर्वचनं धनदापनस्य —

> **तथोपनिधिहर्तारम् अविशेषेण पार्थिवः  ॥ ८.१९१ ॥**

औपरिष्टश्लोकार्धस्योपनिध्यर्थ आरम्भः । चोरवच्छिष्टिर् अधिकाराद् उपनिधाव् अपि स्याद् ब्राह्मणवर्जम् ॥ ८.१९१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

192	The king should compel him who does not restore an open deposit, and in like manner him who retains a sealed deposit, to pay a fine equal (to its value).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/193_upadhAbhish_cha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>193 उपधाभिश् च ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

उपधाभिश् च यः कश् चित्  
परद्रव्यं हरेन् नरः ।  
स-सहायः स हन्तव्यः  
प्रकाशं विविधैर् वधैः  ॥ ८.१९३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/193_upadhAbhish_cha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The man who may appropriate, by fraudulent means, the property of another person, should be punished publicly, along with his accomplices, with various modes of death.—(193)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**उपधा** व्याजः । छद्मेत्य् अनर्थान्तरम् । ताश् चानेकविधाः । द्रव्यपरिवर्तः — कुंकुमं दर्शयित्वा कुसुम्भादिदानम्, तुलादिमानापचय इत्याद्याः । तत्र चान्यं विधिं वक्ष्यति "नान्यद् अन्येन संसृष्टम्" (म्ध् ८.२०३) इत्यादि । इह तु वित्रासनं[^६१२] राजत[^६१३] उपकारदर्शनं कन्यानुरागकथनम् इत्य् एवमाद्या गृह्यन्ते । "चौरास् त्वां मुष्णान्ति यद्य् अहं त्वां न रक्षामि," "राजा तवात्यन्तं कुपितो मया तु बहु समाहितम्," "राजतस् ते नगराधिकारं दापयामि," "मुख्यं वोपकारं करोमि," "पुष्पमित्रदुहिता त्वय्य्[^६१४] अत्यन्तम् अनुरागिणी मद्धस्त इदम् उपायनं प्रेषितवती" — इत्येवमाद्य्नृतम् उक्त्वात्मीयम् उपायनम् आसज्य बहु प्रतिनयन्ति । तत्समक्ष्यं च राजनि तत्समे[^६१५] वा कार्यान्तरम् उपांशु निवेद्य कथयन्ति- "त्वदीयं कार्यम् उपक्रान्तम्" इत्य् एवमाद्याभिर् **उपधाभिः** **परद्रव्यं** च भुञ्जते । तेषाम् अयं राजमार्गे **प्रकाशं विविधः** कुठारशूलारोपणहस्तिपदमर्दनाद्यनेकोपायसाध्नो वध उच्यते । 


[^६१५]:
     J: tatsamaṃ


[^६१४]:
     M G: tv


[^६१३]:
     DK (1: 744): rājyata


[^६१२]:
     M G: citrāsanaṃ

<u>अन्ये</u> तु प्रकरणान् निक्षेपविषयम् एवेदम् आहुः । तत्र हि प्रतिपद्यान्यत्र मया निहितं स च न संनिहितः श्वःपरश्व आगच्छतीत्य् असमर्पयन् हरतीति ॥ ८.१९३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Fraudulent means*,’ ‘deceit,’ and ‘pretence’ are synonymous terms: and
this ‘fraud’ is of several forms:—(1) ‘altering the thing’: having shown
saffron, the man substitutes the *kusumbha* flower for it,—(2) ‘using
short weights and measures,’ and so forth. The rule regarding these
forms of ‘fraud’ is going to be laid down later on, under 203 *et seq*.
The forms of ‘fraudulent moans’ meant here are—(a) ‘threatening,’ (b)
promising rewards from the king, (e) promising to secure the love of a
maiden, and so forth.

The man makes such false assertions to the other person as—(a) ‘robbers
shall rob you, if I do not protect you,’ or (b) ‘the king was very angry
with you, and I have tried much to appease him,’ or (c) ‘I shall obtain
for you from the king the post of the city-officer,’ or (d) ‘I shall
secure for you some other great benefit,’ or (e) ‘my daughter is very
much in love with you and has sent you this present’;—under these
pretexts he brings to the man some presents and takes away from him much
more valuable things in return;—and in the presence of this other party
he whispers something to the king, or to some other high official, and
says to the man—‘I have been talking regarding your business.’

The man who, by such fraudulent means, enjoys the property of others,
for him the punishment is that he shall be punished ‘*publicly*’—on the
public road—with such ‘*modes of death*,’ as ‘decapitation with the
axe,’ ‘impalement,’ ‘tramling (trambling?) by elephants’ and so forth.

Others have held, on the strength of the ‘context,’ that what is said
here pertains to the case of ‘Deposits’; in this sense the ‘fraudulent
means’ would consist in putting off the restoration by such pretexts
as—‘I do not remember where I kept the thing,’ ‘the article was kept by
another person, who is not here now, he shall come to-morow’ and so
forth; and the man who thus puts it off is said to ‘appropriate’
it.—(193)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 92), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Upadhābhiḥ*,’ by fraud;—‘*sahāya*’ is one who helps
in the misappropriation of other’s property by fraud;—‘*prakāśam*’, in
the public square and such places;—it is quoted again at p. 316;—in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 39), which explains ‘*upadhā*’ as
‘fraud’—‘*sahāya*’ as ‘abettor in the fraudulent appropriation,’—and
‘*vadha*’ as ‘beating, imprisonment and so forth’;—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (84a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.193-194)  
**

[\[See the texts under
190-192.\]]

*Nārada* (2.3).—‘In whatever manner a man may have delivered any of his
effects to another, in that same manner shall the article be restored to
him. Delivery and receipt should be equal.’

*Bṛhaspati* (12.9).—‘A deposit must be returned to the very man who
bailed it, in the very manner in which it was bailed.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पवित्रासनेनाशादानेन स्वकलत्रसं[भोग]न्यासेनागामिकालोपकारप्रदर्शनेनेत्य् एवमादिभिर् उपधाभिः परद्रव्यापहारी ससहायो विविधैर् वधिः प्रकाशम् अनुशासनीयः, येन कष्ट[तरस् तदीयनिग्रहस् स]र्वद्रव्यापहारेणेति ॥ ८.१९२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

193	That man who by false pretences may possess himself of another's property, shall be publicly punished by various (modes of) corporal (or capital) chastisement, together with his accomplices.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/194_nixepo_yaH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>194 निक्षेपो यः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

निक्षेपो यः कृतो येन  
यावांश् च कुलसंनिधौ ।  
तावान् एव स विज्ञेयो  
विब्रुवन् दण्डम् अर्हति  ॥ ८.१९४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/194_nixepo_yaH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

As much of a certain deposit has been entrusted in the presence of a number of men—so much should it be decided to be; the party misrepresenting it becomes liable to punishment.—(194)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**य** इति निक्षिप्यमाणद्रव्यजातिनिर्देशः । **यावान्** इति परिमाणस्य । य आह- "सुवर्णम् एतस्य हस्ते मया निक्षिप्तं कांस्यं ददाति, शतं च स्थापितम् अर्धं ददाति" । स पृच्छ्यते- "किं रहस्य् उत कस्यचित् समक्षम्" इति । स चेद् आह- **कुलसंनिधौ** । कुलं साक्षिणः ।[^६१६] तत्र ते पृष्टा यदाहुस् तद् एव सत्यम् । **विब्रुवन्** विरुद्धं ब्रुवाणो दण्ड्यते । तत्रापि यदि ब्रूयात् साक्षिसमक्षं रूप्यं[^६१७] तैर् विनान्यत् स्थापितम् इति । अस्त्य् अत्र प्रमाणान्तरव्यापारणावसरः । अयम् अपि श्लोको नाधिकविध्यर्थः ॥ ८.१९४ ॥


[^६१७]:
     J: kathaṃ


[^६१६]:
     M G DK add: puruṣās
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Certain*’ refers to the kind or quality of the substance, and ‘*as
much*’ to its *quantity*, *e.g*., one party says—‘I had deposited gold
with him and he is giving me back bell-metal; I had deposited a hundred
and he is giving me only half of it’;—on being asked—“Did you hand over
the deposit in secret or before witnesses?”—if he says ‘*in the presence
of a number of men*’—*i.e*., witnesses—then what these men, on being
questioned, should declare, should be regarded as the truth.

‘*Misrepresenting*’—*i.e*., asserting otherwise than this, the party is
punished.

If however the complainant says that the deposit was not handed over in
the presence of witnesses, there is an occasion for the admitting of
other kinds of proof.

This verse also prescribes nothing new.—(194)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 664), which explains ‘*vibruvan*’
as ‘telling what is not true;’—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 94), which adds
the following notes:—‘*Vibruvan*,’ declaring it to be more when it was
less; from a parity of reasoning, it follows that if the depository also
declares the deposit to be less where it was really more, he also should
be fined;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (85a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.193-194)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.193].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ससाक्षिके सति निक्षेपे सा[क्षिणाम् ग्राम्यादीनाम् एव] प्रमाणं स्याद् अर्थसंख्यापरिमाणे ॥ ८.१९३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

194	If a deposit of a particular description or quantity is bailed by anybody in the presence of a number (of witnesses), it must be known to be of that particular (description and quantity; the depositary) who makes a false statement (regarding it) is liable to a fine.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/195_mitho_dAyaH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>195 मिथो दायः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

मिथो दायः कृतो येन  
गृहीतो मिथ एव वा ।  
मिथ एव प्रदातव्यो  
यथा दायस् तथा ग्रहः  ॥ ८.१९५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/195_mitho_dAyaH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When a trust has been created privately and accepted also privately, then it should be restored also secretly: as the delivery so the restoration.—(195)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"यो यथा निक्षिपेत्" (म्ध् ८.१८०) इत्य् अनेन निक्षिप्तविधिर् अयम् उक्तः[^६१८] । अन्येषु कार्येष्व् अनेन प्रतिपद्यते । ऋणादानोपनिधिविक्रयाद्य् अपि येन यादृशेन प्रकारेण कृतं तादृशेनैव प्रत्यर्पणीयम् । रहसि कृतस्य राजकुले ऽंशमार्गणादिना प्रकाशनं न कर्तव्यम् । तेन स्वहस्तलेख्येन ऋणे गृहीते न राजकुले ऽंशं दाप्यते । उत्तमर्णधनं क्षपणीयम् । 


[^६१८]:
     DK (1: 739): uktvā

अनेनैव निक्षेपे ऽपि सिद्धे तत्र पुनर्वचनं नित्यार्थम् । तेन निक्षेपाद् अन्यत्र रहसि कृतस्यापि विप्रतिपत्त्याशङ्कायां प्रकाशं प्रतिदानं कदाचिद् अस्ति । अथ वेहाप्रकाशकृतस्य प्रकाशीकरणं निषिध्यते । तत्र त्व् अन्यो ऽर्थः समुद्रो ऽसमुद्र इत्यादि तेनापौनरुक्त्यम् ।   

**मिथः**शब्दो रहसि विज्ञेयः । अथ वा परस्परं **मिथः** । सर्वं कार्यं द्वाभ्यां साध्यं दानादि परस्परम् एव क्रियत इति । पुनर्वचनं तृतीयप्रतिषेधार्थम् । **दाय**शब्दः सामान्यशब्दो निक्षेपाद् अन्यान् अपि विक्रयादीन् आह ॥ ८.१९५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Verse 180 has laid down the rule regarding *deposits*; and the present
verse lays down what is to be done in the case of other transactions.

In the case of debts, friendly loans and sales, the restoration or
repayment should be in the same manner in which it had been contracted.
So that if it has been given privately, it should not be made public by
seeking for re-payment through a court of justice; and when a loan has
been given on the strength of a document written by the debtor alone,
then its payment should not be sought for through court. If this were
done, the creditor’s property should be made to suffer.

The case of deposits also being covered by this same rule, the addition
of a rule in regard to them separately is meant to indicate that in
their case the rule is *absolute*; hence in the case of transactions
other than deposits, when effected in private, if subsequently suspicion
should arise regarding the possibility of dispute, it may he right and
proper to make it public.

Or the repetition may he justified on the ground that what is done in
the present verse is the prohibition of making public what has been done
in private, while in the preceding verse what has been said concerns
‘sealed or open deposits.’

The term ‘*mithaḥ*’ means ‘*in private*,’ or ‘*mutually*’ As all
transactions are done between two parties, the addition of this adverb
is meant to deny the presence of a third party.

‘*Dāya*,’ ‘*Trust*,’ though a generic term, stands here for transactions
other than ‘deposits,’—such, for instance, as *sale* and the like.—(195)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra 113b), which has the
following notes:—‘*Dāya*,’ handing over, pledging,
depositing,—‘*graha*,’ receiving the deposit
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (2.6).—‘Deposits are of two kinds—attested and unattested. They
must be restored precisely in the same condition in which they were
delivered.’

*Bṛhaspati* (12.5).—‘A deposit is of two kinds—attested and deposited in
private; it must be guarded with the same care as a son.’

Do. (12-14).—‘When a dispute arises with regard to a deposit privately
made, the performance of an ordeal is ordained for both parties, to
establish the facts of the case.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उपनिध्यर्थो ऽयं पुनरारम्भः । "यो यथा निक्षिपे[द् धस्ते" इति] पूर्वश्लोके निक्षेपप्रकरणोक्तं तदर्थ एव । अयं पुनर् उपनिध्यर्थत्वात् पुनरुक्तस् तेनैव विज्ञेयः । सामान्यविशेषप्रकॢप्त्या वानयोः स्लोकयोर् अपुनरुक्तता वर्णयितव्या ॥ ८.१९४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

195	But if anything is delivered or received privately, it must be privately returned; as the bailment (was, so should be) the re-delivery.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/196_nixiptasya_dhanasyaivam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>196 निक्षिप्तस्य धनस्यैवम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

निक्षिप्तस्य धनस्यैवं  
प्रीत्योपनिहितस्य च ।  
राजा विनिर्णयं कुर्याद्  
अक्षिण्वन् न्यासधारिणम्  ॥ ८.१९६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/196_nixiptasya_dhanasyaivam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Thus shall the king come to a decision regarding property given as ‘deposit’ and that which is given as ‘friendly loan,’—without causing any injury to the keeper of the deposit.—(196)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

प्रकरणोपसंहारो ऽनेन क्रियते । **प्रीत्योपनिहितस्य** स्नेहेन किंचित् कालं भोगार्थं दत्तस्य, न्यासो निक्षेपस् तस्य धारणको यथा न पीड्यते तथा निर्णयः कर्तव्य इति । **अक्षिण्वन्न्** अपीडयन् । 

द्वित्राः[^६१९] श्लोका निक्षेपकरणे विध्यर्थाः । सर्वम् अन्यद् अन्यतः सिद्धं सौहार्देनोक्तम्[^६२०] ॥ ८.१९६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse sums up the section.

‘*What is given as friendly loan*’—*i.e*., what is given, through
friendship, for being used for some time.

The cases have to be decided in such a way as noṭ to cause injury to the
keeper of the pledge or deposit. ‘*Akṣiṇvan*’—without causing injury to.

In the whole of this section on ‘deposits’ only two or three verses are
mandatory in their character, all the rest is purely
commendatory,—mentioning things already known, in a friendly
spirit.—(196)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 95), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Akṣiṇvan*,’ not harassing the person who is believed
to have been the holder of the deposit;—and in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 209), which explains ‘*aprakṣiṇvan*’ (which is its
reading for ‘*akṣiṇvan*’), as ‘not chastising.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

समुद्रो विमुद्रो वा निक्षेपः । विमुद्र एव तु प्रीतिविमुक्तभोग उपनिधिः । तयोर् अन्वेषणविधिर् अयं विज्ञेयः । अस्वामिविक्रय इदानीम् उच्यते ॥ ८.१९५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

196	Thus let the king decide (causes) concerning a deposit and a friendly loan (for use) without showing (undue) rigour to the depositary.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/197_vikrINIte_parasya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>197 विक्रीणीते परस्य ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

विक्रीणीते परस्य स्वं  
यो ऽस्वामी स्वाम्यसम्मतः ।  
न तं नयेत साक्ष्यं तु  
स्तेनम् अस्तेनमानिनम्  ॥ ८.१९७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/197_vikrINIte_parasya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a man sells another man’s property, without being its owner, and without the owner’s consent, the judge shall not admit him as a witness,—he being a thief; though he may not be regarded as a thief.—(197)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अस्वामिविक्रयाख्यविवादपदम् इदम् अनुक्रान्तम् । **परस्य** यद् द्रव्यादि **स्वं** तच् चेद् **अस्वामी** तत्पुत्रादिर् अन्यो वा **विक्रीणीते** स्वामिनाननुज्ञातस् तं **स्तेनं** चौरं विद्यात् । यद्य् अपि यस् तस्मात् क्रीणाति स तम् अस्तेनं मन्यते । **न तं नयेत साक्ष्यं तु** । तं पुरुषं न नयेत न प्रापयेत् साक्षयं न कारयेत् साक्षिकरणे न नियोक्तव्य इत्य् अर्थः । यथा चौरस् तादृश एवासौ । स्तेनत्वाच् च न साक्षित्वम्[^६२१] । न साक्षित्व एव प्रतिषेधः । किं तर्हि सर्वासु साधुजनसाध्यासु क्रियासु । परस्वम् अननुज्ञातेन विक्रीतं क्रेतुर् न स्वं भवतीति सिद्धे साक्षिकर्मनिषेधद्वारेण प्रतिषेधो वैचित्र्यार्थः ॥ ८.१९७ ॥


[^६२१]:
     M G omit: na sākṣitvam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The text now proceeds to deal with the head of dispute called ‘Sale
without Ownership.’

The ‘*property*’—articles—that belongs to another person,—if a person,
who is not the owner—*i.e*., who is not the son or any such relative of
the owner,—and who has not obtained the consent of the
owner,—‘*sells*,’—him the judge shall regard as a ‘*thief*’; though the
person who buys it from him may not regard him as a thief.

Him the judge ‘*shall not admit as a witness*,’— shall not call him as a
witness; because he is just like a thief; and being a thief, he is not
fit for being called as a witness.

The present exclusion is meant to be, not only from being called as a
witness, but from all such acts as are to be done by a gentleman.

When a property is sold by one who is not its owner, without the consent
of the real owner, it does not become the property of the buyer;—this
fact being already known, the forbidding of such a transaction by means
of asserting that such a person is not fit for being called as a
witness, is meant to be only a diversified way of saying things—(197)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 103), which explains the
phrase ‘*na tam nayet sākṣyam*’ as ‘should place no confidence in
him’;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, 26b);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p.
41), which explains ‘*sākṣyam*’ as ‘trustworthy evidence’;—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (85b), which explains ‘*na tam nayet sākṣyam*’ as ‘no
trust is to be placed in him’—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 115b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (7.1).—‘When a property kept as deposit, or the property of a
stranger lost by him and found by another, or a stolen article,—is sold
in secret, it has to he considered as *sale without ownership*.’

*Bṛhaspati* (13.2).—‘An open deposit, a bailment for delivery, a sealed
deposit, stolen property, a pledge, or what has been borrowed for
use;—when any one of these articles has been sold in secret by a man, he
is declared to be one *selling without ownership*.’

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 100).—‘An article borrowed for use, deposit
sealed or open, or anything stolen from another,—if any of these is sold
by a man, it is a case of *sale without ownership*.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

न तं नयेत साक्ष्यम् इत्य् अस्य प्रदर्शनार्थत्वात् सर्वाप्रामाण्याद् एव तं निवर्तयति ॥ ८.१९६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

197	If anybody sells the property of another man, without being the owner and without the assent of the owner, the (judge) shall not admit him who is a thief, though he may not consider himself as a thief, as a witness (in any case).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/198_avahAryo_bhavech.md">
<details open><summary><h3>198 अवहार्यो भवेच् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अवहार्यो भवेच् चैव  
सान्वयः षट्शतं दमम् ।  
निर्-अन्वयो ऽनपसरः  
प्राप्तः स्याच् चौरकिल्बिषम्  ॥ ८.१९८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/198_avahAryo_bhavech.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a relative, he shall be made to pay the penalty of six hundred; if he is not a relative, nor one having access to him, he shall incur the guilt of theft (specially).—(198)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वेण साधुजनकर्तृकासु क्रियासु साक्ष्यादिष्व् अपि अस्वामिक्रियकारिणाम् अनर्हतोक्ता । अनेन **षट्शतो** दण्ड उच्यते । षट्कार्षापणशतानि **अवहार्यो** दापयितव्यो दण्ड्य इति यावत् । **सान्वयः** । अन्वयो ऽनुगमनसंबन्धः । स यस्यास्ति पुत्रभ्रात्रादिः स्वामिनो ऽनुगतः **सान्वयः** । स ह्य् अननुज्ञातो ऽपि विक्रीणानो न स्फुटचोरो यतस् तस्येयं बुद्धिर् मदीयम् एवैतद् यत् पितुर् इति, तं प्रतीयम् अपि संभावना भवति । तस्यैव विक्रीय मूल्यं ददाति । यस् त्व् अत्यन्तासंबन्धः स **निरन्वयः** । **चौरकिल्बिषं** निग्रहं निःसंशयं प्राप्तः । **अनपसरः** । यदि तद्गृहं तस्य नापसृतं भवति तद्**आनपसरश्** चौरवद् दण्ड्यः । यदि तु तद्गृहाद् एव केनचिद् दत्तं विक्रीतं वा तस्य तेन वाज्ञत्वात्[^६२२] तत्प्रतिगृहीतं प्रकाशक्रयेण वा विक्रीतं तदा न चौरवद् दण्ड्यः । **षऋशतम्** एव् दाप्यः । 


[^६२२]:
     M G DK (1: 758): vājñāṃ datvā

अथ वा अन्वयो विक्रीणाति तस्य विक्रेयद्रव्यस्यान्यतः क्रयः **अपसरः** क्रयाद् अन्यः प्रतिग्रहादिर् आगमः । एतद् उक्तं भवति । यदि तेन तन् न कुतश्चन कृईतं नापि प्रतिगृहादिना लब्दं तदा चौरः ॥ ८.१९८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The preceding verse has declared that the man who sells the property of
another person is not fit to be admitted to any transaction done by
gentlemen, such as the giving of evidence and so forth; and the present
verse prescribes for him the penalty of the fine of six hundred. He
shall be made to pay—fined—six hundred coins.

‘*If a relative*,’ ‘*sānvaya*’;—‘*anvaya*’ means *relation*; he who has
some *relationship* is a ‘*relative*,’—such as the son, the wife, the
brother and so forth. If such a relative, even though not actually
permitted to sell, sells a property, he is not quite a thief; for he is
likely to have the idea ‘if it belongs to my father, it is mine’; and in
his case it is likely that he will hand over the sale-proceeds to the
rightful owner.

The man who has absolutely no relationship with the owner is said to be
‘*not a relative*,’ ‘*niranvayaḥ*’; and such a person ‘*incurs the
guilt* *of* *a thief*’—*i.e*., deserves to be punished as such,
undoubtedly. Specially so if he is ‘*not one having access*’; *i.e*., if
he has no free access to the household of the owner, he should certainly
be punished as a thief. If, on the other hand, the property sold by him
has been obtained from the household itself,—having been given or sold
by some one in the house,—and he has received it through ignorance or
folly,—or if he has bought it in an open sale,—then he shall not be
punished as a thief; he shall only be fined six hundred.

Or the term ‘*apasara*,’ ‘*access*,’ may be taken as standing for modes
of acquisition other than *purchase*,—snoh as gift and the like. The
meaning thus is—‘He is to be regarded as a thief, if he has not
purchased it from anyone, nor acquired it through gift or other modes of
acquisition.’—(198)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 103), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Avahāryo bhavet*,’ should be fined;—‘*svānvayaḥ*’
(which is its reading for ‘*sānvayaḥ*’) a son or some relation of the
rightful owner;—‘*ṣaṭśatam*,’ six hundred *paṇas*;—‘*niranvayaḥ*,’ not
related to the rightful owner;—‘*anapasaraḥ*,’ means *the removing of
the property from the owner’s house*;—and the man who does this and
sells what belongs to another should be fined six hundred *paṇas*. If
this seller is not a relative of the owner,—and if the removing of the
property from the owner’s house has been done, not by any person related
to the owner, but by the seller himself,—then he should be punished like
a thief. If however the removing has been done by some one else, but the
selling is done by the owner’s relative, then the fine may be even more
than six hundred *paṇas*.—The author of

*Kalpataru* has explained ‘*apasara*’ as the justification for moving
the article from the owner’s possession—such as its being a gift and so
forth *by which property moves away from the owner’s possession*
(*apasarati anena*); and he who has no such justification is
‘*anapasara*’; and this writer adds that this view has the support of
Bhāguri, Medhātithi and the *Vṛttikāra*.

It is quoted in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 41) which has the following
notes:—‘*Avahāryaḥ*,’ should be made to give up,—‘*sānvayaḥ*’ belonging
to the family of the owner of the property concerned,—‘*niranvayaḥ*,’
not a member of the owner’s family,—‘*anapasaraḥ*,’ ‘who has not
received the property by any equitable method of acquisition, such as
gift and the like’—‘*ṣaṭśatam*,’ he is to be fined 600 *paṇas*;—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (85b), which explains ‘*avahāryaḥ*’ as ‘should be made
to pay—‘*sānvayaḥ*’, as ‘along with his brothers and
relatives,’—‘*ṣaṭśatam*,’ *i.e*., 600 *paṇas*.—It goes on to say what
has been quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (above).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.198-199)**

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 95).—‘When the rightful owner has found the article
that he had lost or which had been stolen from him, he shall have the
man in possession of it arrested by the Judge. If the exigencies of time
and place do not permit of this procedure, he may himself arrest the man
and take him to the Judge;—the Judge shall ask the man in possession
—*From where did you obtain this thing*? If the man explains the manner
of his acquisition, but fails to produce the man who had sold it to him,
he should be let off after he has surrendered the property; if the
vendor is produced, the vendor should he made to pay the price obtained
to the purchaser, and also a penalty for theft.’

*Nārada* (7.4, 5).—‘The purchaser must not make a secret of the way in
which he came by a chattel purchased by him. He becomes free from blame
if he can point out the way in which the chattel was acquired by him. In
any other case, he is equally guilty with the vendor and shall suffer
the punishment of a thief. The vendor shall restore the property to the
rightful owner, and shall pay to the purchaser the price for which he
had sold it; besides that, he shall pay a fine to the King.’

*Bṛhaspati* (13.3, 4).—‘When the vendor has been produced and cast in
the suit, the judge shall make him pay the price to the buyer and a fine
to the King, and to restore the property to the owner. When the former
owner comes forward and makes good his claim to the thing sold, the
vendor shall be produced by the purchaser, who thereupon becomes
cleared.’

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 202).—‘When the purchaser has shown the
person from whom he had purchased the article, he shall not be blamed in
any way; after that, the dispute shall he between that person and the
rightful owner of the lost article.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.168, 169, 170).—‘If one’s property has been sold by
another person, the property shall be restored to him; the purchaser
becomes guilty if he cannot produce the seller; and he shall be dealt
with as a *thief*, if he bought the thing either in secret, or at a very
low price, or at an improper time. If a man comes by his property that
had been lost or stolen, he should have the possessor arrested; or if
the time or place does not permit of this, he shall arrest him himself
and produce him before the court; the man becomes absolved from blame on
producing the seller; and from the seller, the owner recovers his
property,—the purchaser, the price that he had paid, and the King, a
fine.’

*Bṛhaspati* (13.11)—‘That should be regarded as *Fraudulent Purchase*
which is made at an unreasonably low price, or in the interior of a
house, or outside of the village, or at night, or in secret, or from a
dishonest person.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**अवहार्यो** दण्ड्यः **सान्वयः** सनिःसरः षट्शतं दमम् । **निरन्वयस्** तद् **अनपसरः प्राप्तः स्याच् चोरकिल्बिषम्** इत्य् अनेनापराधमहत्त्वाद् दण्डमहत्त्वं दर्शयति पूर्वस्मात् । अन्यस् त्व् आह- **अपसरः** क्रयाद् अन्यो धनागमः । एवं च सति — ॥ ८.१९७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

198	If the (offender) is a kinsman (of the owner), he shall be fined six hundred panas; if he is not a kinsman, nor has any excuse, he shall be guilty of theft.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/199_asvAminA_kRto.md">
<details open><summary><h3>199 अस्वामिना कृतो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अस्वामिना कृतो यस् तु  
दायो विक्रय एव वा ।  
अकृतः स तु विज्ञेयो  
व्यवहारे यथा स्थितिः  ॥ ८.१९९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/199_asvAminA_kRto.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a gift or sale is made by one who is not the owner, it should be held to be as not-made,—such being the rule of judicial proceedings.—(199)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

न केवलम् अस्वामिसकाशाद् यत् क्रीतं तन् न सिध्यति, किं तर्हि प्रतिगृहीतम् अपि । प्रतिग्रहेण प्रीत्या वा दानं **दायः,** सो ऽपि न सिध्यति । "विक्रीणीते परस्य" (म्ध् ८.१९७) इत्य् अनेन विक्रेतुः प्रतिग्रहीतुश् चास्वाम्यम् उच्यते । "स्वामी रिक्थक्रय" (ग्ध् १०.३९) इत्यादिना स्वाम्याशङ्कायां प्राप्तो ऽयं प्रतिषेधः । **व्यवहार** एषा **स्थितिर्** नातिक्रमणीया ॥ ८.१९९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It is not only purchase from one who is not the owner that is
invalid,—but also what is received as ‘*gift*’—a ‘gift’ is that which is
given either as *charity* or as a *friendly present*,—is not valid.

Verse 197 has declared that neither the buyer nor the seller is the
owner of the property; and the present verse denies the ownership in
cases where it may be considered as having been acquired, in accordance
with the law that—‘one becomes the owner, through inheritance, purchase,
partition and gift’ (*Gautama*, 10.39).

Such is the rule of judicial proceedings, and it should not be
transgressed.—(199)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Buhler wrongly asserts that “Nandana omits this verse.”

This verse is quoted (as Nārada’s) in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 40);—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (86a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.198-199)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.198].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

क्रयविक्रयाव् अस्वामिकृतौ निपात्याव् एव । तथा च स्वाम्य् एव धनभाक् स्यात् । न तु क्रेता विक्रेता वा धने स्वामी परितोषणीयः । इदानीम् अस्वामिसकाशात् क्रीतस्य दश[वर्ष]भोगाभिगमेन मा भूत् स्वत्वम् इति, यत इदम् आह — ॥ ८.१९८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

199	A gift or sale, made by anybody else but the owner, must be considered as null and void, according to the rule in judicial proceedings.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/200_sambhogo_dRshyate.md">
<details open><summary><h3>200 सम्भोगो दृश्यते ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

संभोगो दृश्यते यत्र  
न दृश्येतागमः क्व चित् ।  
आगमः कारणं तत्र  
न संभोग इति स्थितिः  ॥ ८.२०० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/200_sambhogo_dRshyate.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Where possession is evident, but no sort of title is perceptible, there title, and not possession, shall be the proof; such is the settled rule.—(200)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यस्मिन् वस्तुनि गोवस्तुहिरण्यक्षेत्रादाव् अन्यस्य **भोगो** दृश्यते अन्यस्य च रिक्थप्रतिग्रहादिर् **आगमः** स्वाम्यापादकस् **तत्रागमो** बलवान् **न भोगः** । भोग एव **संभोगः** । **कारणं** स्वाम्ये । **तत्रेति स्थितिः** । एवम् अनादिव्यवस्था न भोगमात्रेण स्वत्वम् । यादृशेन च स्वत्वं तत् पुरस्ताद् व्याख्यातम् । "यत् किंचिद् दशवर्षाणि" (म्ध् ८.१४७) इति वानेन विरोधस् तत्रैव परिहृतः ॥ ८.२०० ॥



##### ०३
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In a case where, in connection with such things as cattle, gold, lands
and so forth, one man is found to have ‘possession,’—while the ‘title,’
arising from inheritance, gift and other sources, indicates the
ownership of another man,—it is ‘title’ that is to be regarded as more
authoritative; and mere possession is no proof of ownership.

‘*Such is the settled rate*’;—the eternal rule is that mere possession
does not create ownership; what sort of possession does create ownership
has been explained before, under verse 147; and the seeming
incompatibility of the present verse with that has also been explained
under that same verse.—(200)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 635), which says that what is
meant is that what proof of ownership is, not mere possession, but
possession accompanied by ‘title’—*i.e*., something that indicates
actual ownership.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.171).—‘By title and by possession shall the rightful
owner establish his claim to a lost property; if he fails to establish
his claim, he shall be fined; he should be made to pay a fine the fifth
part of the value of the article concerned.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवं चागमाद् अशुद्धद्रव्यस्य दशवर्षभोगेनापि न स्वामित्वम् । यतश् चैतद् एवम् अतः — ॥ ८.१९९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

200	Where possession is evident, but no title is perceived, there the title (shall be) a proof (of ownership), not possession; such is the settled rule.
</details>
</details>
</div>

  
## 201-250
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/201_vikrayAd_yo.md">
<details open><summary><h3>201 विक्रयाद् यो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

विक्रयाद् यो धनं किं चिद्  
गृह्णीयत् कुलसंनिधौ ।  
क्रयेण स विशुद्धं हि  
न्यायतो लभते धनम्  ॥ ८.२०१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/201_vikrayAd_yo.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a man obtains a property from the market, in the presence of witnesses, he acquires that property with a clear title obtained by legal purchase.—(201)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यादृशेन क्रयेण स्वाम्यं भवति तं दर्शयति । विक्रीणते ऽस्मिन् व्यवहारिण इति **विक्रयः** आपणभूमिः, ततो यो **गृह्णीयाद्** **धनं** गवादि क्रीयमाणं द्रव्यं मूल्यं वा स **लभते** **न्यायतः** **क्रयेण** । **कुलसंनिधौ** **विशुद्धम्** । **न्यायतः क्रय** उचितेन मूल्येन । असंभाव्यपापपुरुषाकुलस्यान्यव्यवहर्तृमेलककारपुरुषसमूहस्य समक्षं गृहीतं **लभते** नापहारयति । अन्यथा स्वामिना विक्रये[^१] तु द्रव्यं प्रतिनीयते[^२], किं तु मूल्यं लभते । तस्माद् यस् तस्य विक्रयी सो ऽन्ययतः[^३] क्रयेण तु दण्ड्यते मूल्यं च हारयति । एतद् उक्तम् ।


[^३]:
     M G DK: vikrayī anyayataḥ


[^२]:
     M G DK add: asya nyāyato vikraye


[^१]:
     M G DK (1: 759) omit: vikraye

- विक्रेतुर् दर्शनाच् छुद्धिः स्वामी द्रव्यं नृपो दमम् ।

- क्रेता मूल्यम् अवाप्नोति तस्माद् यस् तस्य विक्रयी ॥ (य्ध् २.१७४)

एष एवार्थओ ऽनेन[^४] श्लोकेन प्रतिपाद्यते ॥ ८.२०१ ॥


[^४]:
     M G: evārthas tena
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The present verse shows by what sort of purchase real ownership is
produced.

‘*Vikraya*,’ ‘*market*,’ is the place where people sell their goods. If
one obtains from the market, some property,—goods put up for sale, in
the shape of cattle and the rest,—or the price is paid for it,—‘*he
acquires it*’— by ‘*legal purchase*,’ by paying the proper price,—‘*in
the presence of witnesses*’—in the shape of intermediaries and brokers;
and thus ‘*he acquires it*,’ and does not forfeit it. If the thing has
been purchased from one who is not the rightful owner of it, then the
property is restored to the rightful owner, and the *bonafide* purchaser
obtains the price he had paid from the person who had sold it to him. In
the event of his purchase being not *bonafide*, he is punished and also
forfeits the property. This is what is thus asserted—‘The purchaser
proves his *bonafides* by producing the seller, the rightful owner
receives the property, and the king receives the fine paid by the
seller, the purchaser receives back the price he had paid from the
purchaser’ (*Yajñavalkya*, 2.170).

This same idea is set forth in the present verse.—(201)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 103), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Vikrayāt*,’ from the market-place;—‘*Kulasannidhau*,’
in the presence of trustworthy traders and brokers;—‘*Nyāyataḥ*,’
qualifies ‘*krayeṇa*’;—‘*viśuddhaḥ*’ (which is its reading for
‘*viśuddham*,’) faultless;—‘*labhate dhanam*’, *i.e*., from the
seller;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (85b), which has the following
notes:—‘*Vikrayāt*,’ ‘from the ‘*market place*,’ the word being
explained as ‘*vikrīyate asmin iti vikrayaḥ*,’—‘*kulasannidhau*,’ in the
presence of a number of business-men,—‘*nyāyataḥ*’ is to be construed
with ‘*krayeṇa*,’ and means a *bona fide* purchase, on payment of the
proper price.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Bṛhaspati* (13.7, 8, 10).—‘When a purchase has been made before an
assembly of merchants, the king’s officers also being aware of it,—but
from a vendor whose habitation is unknown, or when the purchaser is
dead,—the owner may recover his own property by paying half the price
tendered; the custom in that case being that one half of the value is
lost to each of the two parties. When a man purchases a commodity at a
fair price, and the purchase has been announced to the King, there is no
wrong about it.’

*Bṛhaspati* (12.3, 4).—‘When the vendor has been produced and has been
cast in the suit, the judge shall cause him to pay the price to the
buyer, a fine to the King, and to restore the property to the owner.
When the former owner comes forward and makes good his claim to the
article purchased, the vendor shall be produced by the purchaser; by
doing so, the purchaser may clear himself.’

*Nārada* (7.2-5)—‘No blame attaches to a sale effected in public; but a
clandestine sale is viewed in the same light as theft, according to law.
The purchaser must not make a secret of the way in which he came by a
chattel purchased by him. He becomes free from blame if he can point out
the way in which the chattel was acquired by him. In any other case he
is equally guilty with the vendor, and shall suffer the punishment of a
thief. The vendor shall restore the property to the rightful owner, and
shall pay to the buyer the price for which it was sold to him; besides
that, he shall pay a fine to the King.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

न्यायतस् तु क्रयः कुलसंनिधाव् उचितेन मूल्येन संभाव्याच् च पुरुषात् । एतच् च तस्यानभियोगं धनलाभश् च युक्तः । एवं बुद्धिपूर्वव्यवहारयिताय न्यायकारिणः ॥ ८.२०० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

201	He who obtains a chattel in the market before a number (of witnesses), acquires that chattel with a clear legal title by purchase.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/202_atha_mUlam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>202 अथ मूलम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अथ मूलम् अनाहार्यं  
प्रकाशक्रयशोधितः ।  
अदण्ड्यो मुच्यते राज्ञा  
नाष्टिको लभते धनम्  ॥ ८.२०२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/202_atha_mUlam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the source cannot be traced, the person (buyer), whose conduct has been cleared by the fact of the sale being public, is let off without punishment, but the man who lost the property shall receive it back.—(202)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

असंभाव्यपापात् तु पुरुषाद् इत्यादि न्यायतः क्रय उक्तः । स चेद् विक्रेत शक्य आहर्तुं तदा पूर्वोक्तो विधिः "स्वामी द्रव्यम्" (य्ध् २.१७४) इत्यादि । अथ स विक्रयी गतः, येन[^५] क्रीतं स्वामिना चिह्नीकृतं तेन च **मूलं** विक्रेता पुरुष आहर्तुं न शक्यते । **प्रकाशं** जनसमक्षं प्रसिद्धाया विक्रयभुवः क्रीतम् अत ईदृशेन क्रयेण शोधिते द्रव्ये शुद्धः क्रेता **अदण्ड्यो मुच्यते** । **धनं** तु नाष्टिकः[^६] स्वामी ज्ञापितस्वं वा लभते । नष्टम् अन्वेषते **नाष्टिकः** । नष्टम् अस्यास्तीत्य् एवं ठनि कृते प्रज्ञादित्वात् स्वार्थिको ऽण् कर्तव्यः । नष्टं प्रयोजनम् अस्येति वा । तेनायं संक्षेपः-[^७] प्रकाशक्रये तु दण्डो न स्याद् धननाशस् तु स्थित एव ॥ ८.२०२ ॥


[^७]:
     M G: saṃkṣepataḥ and adds kraye


[^६]:
     M G: nāṣṭikaṃ


[^५]:
     M G: anyena; DK (1: 760): anena
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been laid down that purchases shall be made from persons not
suspected of dishonesty; hence where the seller is capable of being
produced, the rule just quoted becomes applicable; but if the m in
having sold the property goes away,—and ‘*the source*,’—the
seller—cannot be produced by the man who bought from him the property
that is now recognised by its real owner as his own,—then the purchaser
has his character cleared by the fact that he made the purchase in the
open market,—in the presence of a large number of men; and on that
account he is let off without punishment.

But the property is restored to the rightful owner, ‘*the person who had
lost it*’ and then recognised it as his own.

The term ‘*nāṣṭikaḥ*’ means *he who has lost*, derived from the
participial noun ‘*naṣṭa*’ with the possessive affix ‘*ṭhan*’ and then
the reflexive affix ‘*aṇ*’; or it may be explained as meaning ‘he who is
seeking for his lost property.’

The sense in brief is this:—In the case of a public sale, there is to be
no punishment, but the loss of the price paid remains.—(202).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 103), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Mūlam*,’ the original seller, who sold the article
which did not belong to him;—if he is ‘*anāhārya*’, incapable of being
produced by the purchaser, by reason of his being in a foreign
country;—but the purchaser is one who had made his purchase openly,—then
this latter is not to be punished;—but the actual owner shall receive
back his property which had been fraudulently sold.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 87), which reading ‘*anāhārya*’
for ‘*anāhāryam*’, explains it as ‘not producing;’—the meaning being
‘even though the buyer is unable to produce the original seller, if his
purchase is found to be *bona fide* by reason of its having been done in
public.’

It is quoted in *Aparārka*, (p. 776), which adds the following
explanation:—‘*Mūlam*’ is the original seller;—if he is incapable of
being produced by reason of his whereabouts being unknown.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 215), which adds that
the rightful owner is to receive his property from the purchaser, only
on paying to him one half of the price that had been paid for it;—this
opinion being based upon a clear declaration to that effect by
Kātyāyana;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 43), which adds the following
explanation:—‘Where the selling has been done openly,—and yet the
original owner proves his claim to the property concerned,—and the
property concerned is not returnable, by reason of its having been
exported to foreign lands, and so forth—then the *bona fide* purchaser
is not to be punished, but he is to be made to refund the price to the
real owner—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (86a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

(See the texts under [verses
198-199]
and [verse
201].)

*Viṣṇu* (5.164-165).—‘He who buys unawares in open market the property
of a person other than the rightful owner is not to blame; but the owner
shall recover his property.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.169-170).—(See under 198-199.)

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 176).—‘One should make a purchase and pay its
price openly.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अभियोगकाले च तस्य यदि मूल्यम् आहर्तुं शक्यं [न] स्यात् विक्रेतुर् अभावात्, अतस् तस्य प्रकाशक्रयेण शुद्धस्यादण्डत्वं युक्तम् । अपि च देशान्तराद् आगतैः पापकारिभिः निःशङ्कं राजसंनिधाव् अप्रविकाशं विक्रियते द्रव्यम्, तत्र च यदि मूल्यस्यानाहार्यत्वात् प्रकाशक्रयशुद्धे विक्रये क्रेतुर् दोषः स्यात्, एवं च सति राज्ञः सर्वदिक्को व्यवहारः साधूनाम् अपि विच्छिद्येत । न चैतद् इष्टम् । अतः क्रेतुर्न् अत्र नास्ति दोषः । नाष्टिकस् तु कारणतः स्वम् अर्थं प्रज्ञापयन् कथम् इव न लभते स्वधनम्- अतस् तस्य धनलाभो युक्तः । इतरस्य चादोषत्वाद् अदण्ड्यत्वं युक्तम् । अस्वामिविक्रयव्यवहारसाधर्म्यात् तत्प्रकरणम् एवायम् उच्यते ॥ ८.२०१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

202	If the original (seller) be not producible, (the buyer) being exculpated by a public sale, must be dismissed by the king without punishment, but (the former owner) who lost the chattel shall receive it (back from the buyer).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/203_nA-nyad_anyena.md">
<details open><summary><h3>203 नाऽन्यद् अन्येन ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

नाऽन्यद् अन्येन संसृष्ट-  
रूपं विक्रयम् अर्हति ।  
न चाऽसारं न च न्यूनं  
न दूरेण तिरोहितम् [मेधातिथिपाठः - न सावद्यं न च न्यूनं न  
दूरे]  ॥ ८.२०३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/203_nA-nyad_anyena.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Any commodity that is mixed up with another should not be sold; nor what is without substance, nor what is deficient, nor what is at a distance, nor what is concealed.—(203).
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^९]:
     M G: dūreṇa


[^८]:
     M G: cāsāraṃ

अस्वामिविकर्यप्रसङ्गेनान्यो ऽपि विक्रये धर्म उच्यते । **नान्यत्**[^१०] कुंकुमादिद्रव्यं कुद्रव्येण तदाभासेन कुसुंभादिना **संसृष्टं** विक्रेयम् । यच् च[^११] **असावद्यं** चिरकालं भण्डे ऽवस्थितत्वात् प्राप्तविभावं जीर्णम् अजीर्णाभासं वस्त्रादि । **न च न्यूनं** तुलामानादिना । **दूरे**[^१२]** **दूरस्थितं ग्रामे मम विद्यन्ते वासांसि गुडादि वा द्रव्यम् । **तिरोहितं** स्थगितं वस्त्रादिनान्तर्हितम्, यस्य वा स्वरूपं केनचिद् द्रव्यरागेणान्तर्धीयते पुराणं नववत् प्रतिभाति तत् **तिरोहितं** न विक्रेतव्यम् । इदं द्रव्यम् ईदृशं च प्रदर्श्य विक्रयः कर्तव्यः । अन्यथाकृतस् तु न कृतो दशाहाद् ऊर्ध्वम् अपि प्रत्यर्पणे न दोषः । 


[^१२]:
     M G DK omit: dūre, and add ca after dūrasthitaṃ


[^११]:
     M G: yat tv


[^१०]:
     M G: nānya-

- अन्यस्य दण्डस्येहानाम्नातत्वाद् "उपधाभिः" (म्ध् ८.१९३) इत्य् एष दण्डः । 

प्रकरणभेदेन पठितत्वात्, अस्वामिविक्रयदण्ड इत्य् <u>अन्ये</u> ॥ ८.२०३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In course of the treatment of ‘Sale without Ownership,’ the author
proceeds to lay down other rules also in connection with sales.

‘*Any commodity*’—such as saffron—‘*that is mixed up with
another*’—commodity, which is of an inferior quality, and which is only
similar to it—such as the *kusumbha* flower—‘*should not he sold*.’

‘*Nor what is without substance*’—*i.e*., which, having been kept closed
in a vessel for a long time, has lost its substance, has become
defective and decays, though appearing as fresh; *e.g*., cloth and other
commodities.

‘*Nor what is deficient*’;—*i.e*., less in weight or measure.

‘*Nor what is at a distance*’—away from the place of sale; and described
as ‘clothes or sugar or such things lying in my house in the village.’

‘*Nor what is concealed*’—tied up and hidden in a piece of cloth; or the
real form of which is hidden by the colour of another substance; what is
old but appears to be new is also called ‘concealed.’

Commodity of these kinds should not be sold; it shall be sold after
having been fully exposed and described; sales effected otherwise are
invalid; and there would be nothing wrong in such being revoked even
after the lapse of ten days.

Since no penalty in connection with this is here prescribed, it shall be
understood to be what has been laid down in 193 in connection with
‘fraudulent transactions’ in general.

Others, however, hold that since that penalty is laid down in another
context, that in connection with what is referred to here must he what
has been prescribed for ‘selling without ownership.’—(203)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Tirohitam*’—‘Concealed’—‘in cloth or some such cover’ (Medhātithi and
Nārāyaṇa),—‘in the earth’ (Nandana),—‘covered with paint’ (Govindarāja,
Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 199), which reads
*saṃsṛṣṭam rūpam* for ‘*saṃsṛṣṭarūpam*’ and adds the following
notes:—‘*Anyat*’, saffron and such costly tilings,—‘*anyena*’ the
Kusumbha flower and such cheaper tilings,—‘*saṃsṛṣṭam*,’
adulterated,—‘*rūpam*,’ commodity,—‘*sāvadyam*,’ defective,—this last is
meant to include all defects other than those just
specified;—‘*nyūnam*,’ less in weight—‘*dure*,’ being at a distance and
hence incapable of having its defects detected,—‘*tirohitam*,’ covered
by cloth or some such thing;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (110a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.245).—‘In the sale of medicines, oils, salts, perfumes,
grains, molasses and such things, if the vendor mixes inferior stuff, he
shall be fined 16 *Paṇas*.’

*Katyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 776).—‘One should make a purchase and pay its
price openly.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**अन्यत्** कुङ्कुमादिद्रव्यम् **अन्येन** कुसुम्भादिना द्रव्येण **संसृष्टं विक्रयं** नार्हति । एवं च प्रतिषेधाद् अस्यैवम् अकार्यम् अनुमीयते । एवं **सावद्यम्** असंसृष्टम् अपि यद् भाण्डं पूतिकं चिरन्तनं जीर्णवस्त्रादि । **न च न्यूनं** यत् तुल्यान्तरेण पश्चाद् धीयते पलसंख्यया । न दूरे ऽप्रत्यक्षत्वात् । एतेन **तिरोहितं** व्याख्यातम्- अद्रव्यं वा द्रव्याभासं यत् क्रियते भाण्डरागादिना कर्मणा तत् **तिरोहितम्** । एवं च सति, ईदृशम् एवं विक्रीणानस्य दोषत्वाद् अस्य दण्डार्हता । न केवलम् अशुद्धता विक्रेतुः । तथा च सति, क्रेत्रा ऊर्ध्वम् अपि दशाहाद् एतद् विक्रेतुः प्रत्यर्पणीयम् एव । येनास्याइतत् प्रतिषेधशास्त्रम् असद्विक्रयेणापोदितम्, "परेण तु दशाहस्य न दद्यान् नापि दापयेत्" इति । विक्रयसंबन्धेनैवायम् अपरः कान्यव्यवहारः शुल्काश्रयः प्रस्तूयते — ॥ ८.२०२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

203	One commodity mixed with another must not be sold (as pure), nor a bad one (as good), nor less (than the proper quantity or weight), nor anything that is not at hand or that is concealed.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/204_anyA~n_ched.md">
<details open><summary><h3>204 अन्याञ् चेद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अन्यां चेद् दर्शयित्वान्या  
वोढुः कन्या प्रदीयते ।  
उभे त एकशुल्केन  
वहेद् इत्य् अब्रवीन् मनुः  ॥ ८.२०४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/204_anyA~n_ched.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

After one damsel has been shown, if another be given to the bridegroom, then he should marry both of them for the same single price,—so Manu has ordained.—(204)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

विक्रयप्रकारत्वाच् छुल्कादिना कन्यादानस्य अस्मिन्न् प्रकरणे[^१३] धर्म उच्यते । शुल्ककाले रूपवतीं दर्शयित्वा गृहीतशुल्को यस्य[^१४] रूपहीनां ददाति वयोहीनां गूणहीनां वा तस्य्**ओभे**[^१५] ऽपि शुल्कदेन्**ऐकेन** **शुल्केन** हर्तव्ये[^१६] । कन्यानाम् एवायं धर्मः । गवाश्वादिद्रव्याणां त्व् अस्मिन् व्यतिक्रमे ऽन्यो विधिर् वक्ष्यते ॥ ८.२०४ ॥


[^१६]:
     M G: hartavyā


[^१५]:
     M G: tasyobhau


[^१४]:
     M G: 'syāṃ


[^१३]:
     M G: chulkāder yo yat kanyāyā asminn avadhau; DK (1: 881): chulkadeyāyāḥ kanyāyā asminn avadhau
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Since the present context is dealing with matters relating to sales, it
lays down certain rules relating to maidens given in marriage for a
price.

At the time of receiving the price, if the man shows a beautiful girl,
but after having received it, he gives an ugly one, or one not of proper
age, or of inferior qualifications,—then for that same price, the
bridegroom shall marry both the girls.

The rule here laid down pertains to the case of girls only, that
relating to similar frauds in connection with the selling of cattle and
other goods shall be laid down later on.—(204)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“Yet he has emphatically inveighed against the sale of women 3.51,
9.98”—says Hopkins. But he forgets that ‘*śulka*’ is *not price*, Buhler
also has been similarly misled.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.204-205)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (1.66).—‘If a man gives away his daughter in marriage,
without mentioning her defects, he should be fined the highest
amercement.’

*Nārada* (Aparārka, p. 95).—‘If a man gives away a defective girl in
marriage, without mentioning the defect, he should be punished by the
King with the first amercement; the defects of a girl being presence of
chronic and loathsome disease, shortness of limbs, loss of virginity,
immodesty, attachment to another man.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

निरवद्यां कन्यां दर्शयित्वा यः सा[वद्यां ददा]ति तस्य उभे अपि **ते एकशुल्केन**इव वहनीये ॥ ८.२०३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

204	If, after one damsel has been shown, another be given to the bridegroom, he may marry them both for the same price; that Manu ordained.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/205_nonmattAyA_na.md">
<details open><summary><h3>205 नोन्मत्ताया न ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

नोन्मत्ताया न कुष्ठिन्या  
न च या स्पृष्ट-मैथुना ।  
पूर्वं दोषान् अभिख्याप्य  
प्रदाता दण्डम् अर्हति  ॥ ८.२०५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/205_nonmattAyA_na.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The giver, of a girl who is insane or leprous or has suffered copulation, does not deserve punishment, if he has previously declared her defects.—(205)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उन्मत्तादिदोषान् कथयित्वा ददतो दण्डो नास्तीति प्रतिषेधद्वरेणाकथयतो[^१७] दण्डम् आह । न केवलं शुल्के देया, या अन्यस्या अपि[^१८] ब्राह्मादिविवाहेन विवाहयिष्यमाणायाः, दत्ताप्य् अदत्ता भवति, दण्डश् च "प्राप्नुयाच् चौरकिल्बिषम्" (म्ध् ८.१९८) इति जानानस्य । अजानतः षट्शतं[^१९] प्रकृतत्वात् । **उन्मत्तया कुष्ठिन्या** ये कुष्ठोन्मत्तादयः । **या च स्पृष्टमैथुना** तस्याश् च यो दोषो मैथुनस्पर्शः । तान् **दोषान्** **पूर्वं** वाक्प्रदानेन्**आख्याप्य** प्रकाश्यैतद्दोषा कन्येत्य् एवम् उक्त्वा ददतो नास्ति दण्ड इति प्रयोजना ॥ ८.२०५ ॥


[^१९]:
     M G omit: ṣaṭśataṃ


[^१८]:
     M G: anyasyāpi


[^१७]:
     M G J: pratiṣedhadvareṇa kathayato
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

By the declaration that one does not deserve punishment by giving a girl
suffering from the defects of insanity and the rest, after having openly
declared them,—what is meant is that by giving her without declaring the
defects, one does become liable to punishment.

Not only in the case of the girl given for a price, but also in that of
others, who is going to be married by the ‘*Brāhma*’ and other
forms,—the betrothal becomes invalidated, and the penalty is that ‘the
man becomes guilty of theft’ (verse 198),—if he does it intentionally;
the case in which it is done unintentionally does not fall within the
scope of the present context (which deals with ‘*fraud*’).

The construction is as follows:—‘If the man openly declares, at the time
of betrothal, the defect of the ‘*insane*’ girl, *i.e*., insanity,—of
the ‘*leprous*’ girl—*i.e*., leprosy—of the girl who ‘*has suffered
copulation*’—*i.e*., loss of virginity,—by saying ‘this girl has such
and such a defect,’—then he is not liable to punishment.—(205)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.204-205)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.204].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवं च सति दोषवत्यास् तद्दोषाकथने विप[र्ययण दाता दण्ड्यः, पूर्वम् आ]वेदने ऊढायाश् च दोषवत्या अपि परित्यागो नास्ति । क्रमप्राप्तं संभूयसमुत्थानम् अधुनोच्यते, यतः तदर्थं श्रौतम् उदाहरणं दर्शयति ॥ ८.२०४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

205	He who gives (a damsel in marriage), having first openly declared her blemishes, whether she be insane, or afflicted with leprosy, or have lost her virginity, is not liable to punishment.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/206_Rtvig_yadi.md">
<details open><summary><h3>206 ऋत्विग् यदि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ऋत्विग् यदि वृतो यज्ञे  
स्वकर्म परिहापयेत् ।  
तस्य कर्मानुरूपेण  
देयो ऽंशः सहकर्तृभिः  ॥ ८.२०६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/206_Rtvig_yadi.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a priest appointed at a sacrifice abandons his work, his associates shall pay him only such share as may be in keeping with the work actually done by him.—(206)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

संभूयसमुत्थानस्य प्रक्रमो ऽयम् । तत्र वैदिकं तावत् संभूयकार्यम् उदाहरति । **यज्ञो** ज्योतिष्टोमादिः । तत्र यागरूपानेकाङ्गकर्मनिर्वर्तनार्थम् **ऋत्विग् वृतः** "त्वया ममेदं हौत्रं कर्तव्यम् आध्वर्यवम् औद्गात्रं वा" इति[^२०] श्रौतेन विधिनानुष्ठेयम् इत्य् उपगमश् च प्रवर्तितः । कथंचिद् अपाटवादिना सामिकृतं[^२१] यत् **परिहापयेत्** त्यजेत् तदानीं तस्य **देयो** दक्षिण्**आंशः** कर्मानुरूपेण । यावती तस्मिन् क्रतौ दक्षिणा तां निरूप्य चतुर्थे भागे कर्मणः कृते चतुर्थः तृतीये तृतीय[^२२] इत्य् एतद् आनुरूप्यम्[^२३] । **सह कर्तृभिः**। कर्तारः तत्पुरुषाः[^२४] प्रधानर्त्विजां[^२५] होत्रुद्गात्रादीनां[^२६] प्रस्तोतृमैत्रावरुणप्रभृतयः ॥ ८.२०६ ॥


[^२६]:
     M G DK: hotrodgātrādīnāṃ


[^२५]:
     M G J: pradhānartvijo


[^२४]:
     J: puruṣāḥ


[^२३]:
     M G: ārūpyaṃ


[^२२]:
     M G J: kṛte caturthatṛtīya


[^२१]:
     M G: sāmikṛtāṃ


[^२०]:
     M G DK (1: 773): ceti
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse introduces the head of ‘Joint Concerns’: and as an example,
the author takes up the ease of ‘Joint action’ at Vedic rites.

‘*Sacrifice*’—The Jyotiṣṭoma and the rest. For the proper performance of
the numerous details of these sacrifices, when a certain ‘*priest has
been appointed*,’—with the words—‘you should perform the duties of the
‘*Hotṛ*,’ or ‘of the *Adhvaryu*,’ or ‘of the *Udgātṛ*,’—and the further
condition is made—‘you should do the work according to the
*śrauta-rules*’;—if, on account of his inefficiency or other causes, he
happens to abandon it after it has been half-done,—then the share of the
sacrificial fee payable to him shall be in accordance with the amount of
work done by him. For instance, if the man goes away after having done
only a fourth part of his work, he should be paid the quarter of the
third part of the entire ‘fee’ prescribed in connection with the
particular sacrifice concerned. This would be ‘*in accordance with the
work done*.’

‘*By h* *is* *associates*’—*i.e*., the other priests, the *Hotṛ*, the
*Udgātṛ* and the rest.—(206)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 836);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p.
118), which adds the following notes:—‘*Svakarma parihāpayet*,’ *i.e*.,
through sickness or such causes, a part of the sacrificial fee shall be
paid to him, after duly considering the total fee payable for the entire
sacrifice and the part of the work that may have been done by him;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 222), which explains ‘*sahakartṛbhiḥ*’
as ‘by his colleagues’;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 48), which says that
‘if a priest, through disease or other disability, is unable to perform
his work, then he is to be paid his fee in proportion to the work
actually done by him;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (89b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 120a), which explains ‘*sahakartṛbhiḥ*’ as ‘by his
collaborators,’—or the meaning may be ‘he should be paid his share of
the fee, *along with*, at the same time as, the other priests are paid.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

[(See Manu below,
388.)]

*Yājñavalkya* (2.265).—‘Among a company of joint workers, if one happen
to be dishonest, the others should expel him without payment; if he
happen to omit his share of the work on account of his inability to do
it, then he should have it done by another. This same rule applies to
the case of sacrificial priests, cultivators and artisans.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Aparārka, p. 836).—‘If the Sacrificial Priest fails to
officiate at a sacrifice, or if a Teacher fails to teach, he should be
abandoned; one becomes degraded if he abandons them in other
circumstances.’

*Nārada* (Aparārka, p. 836).—‘If the Sacrificial Priest happen to be in
trouble, some one else may officiate for him and receive a proportionate
share out of the fee payable to the former.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 117).—‘From among men employed in a
common work, if one happen to die, his share of the work should be done
by a relation of his, or by his colleagues collectively.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do.).—‘If on the approach of the *Savana*, a priest
should happen to die, what should be done is that his work should be
completed by his *Sagotra* or by his pupil; if he has no relations, then
the sacrificer should appoint another Priest.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रधानर्त्विक् प्रक्रान्तकर्मा यदि **परिहापयेत् स्वकर्म** देशान्तरगमनापाटवादिभिर् अर्थलक्षणैः **तस्य कर्मानुरूप्येण** दक्षिणांशः स्यात् । कथम् । कर्मण[श् चतुर्थे कृते दक्षिणा]या अपि चतुर्भागः । एवं त्रिभागादिष्व् अपि योज्यम् । सह कर्तृभिर् इति [प्रति]प्रस्थातृप्रभृतींस् तत्पुतुषान् आह । अस्यापवादः — ॥ ८.२०५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

206	If an officiating priest, chosen to perform a sacrifice, abandons his work, a share only (of the fee) in proportion to the work (done) shall be given to him by those who work with him.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/207_daxiNAsu_cha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>207 दक्षिणासु च ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

दक्षिणासु च दत्तासु  
स्वकर्म परिहापयन् ।  
कृत्स्नम् एव लभेताऽंशम्  
अन्येनैव च कारयेत्  ॥ ८.२०७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/207_daxiNAsu_cha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who abandons his work after the fees have been paid, should receive his full share; and the work should be got done by another.—(207)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

माध्यन्दिने सवने दक्षीना दीयन्त इति । तत उपरिष्टात् कर्म त्यजताम् अप्रत्याहरणीयां[^२७] लभेत, दक्षिणाम् इति शेषः,[^२८] न प्रतीपं त्याजयेद् इत्य् अर्थः । अन्यां भृतिं दत्वा **अन्येन** पुरुषेण यजमानस् तत्कर्म समापयेत् । ऋत्विग्भिः कर्म कर्तव्यं वरणाच् च ऋत्विजो भवन्ति । तच् च नियतकाले प्राक् कर्मण आरम्भात् । अतः क्रतु क्रियमाणं विगुणं भवति, समाप्तिश् चापि कर्तव्येति विगुणं चेत् समापनीयम् अङ्गान्य् एव तदन्यकर्तृकाणि करिष्यामीति बुद्धिनिवृत्त्यर्थम् उक्तम् **अन्येनैवेति** । तावद् एव विगुणं यद् अशक्यम्, शक्यं तु सर्वं कर्तव्यम् । 


[^२८]:
     M G DK omit: dakṣiṇām iti śeṣaḥ


[^२७]:
     M G: apratyāharaṇīyā; DK (1: 774): apratyāharaṇīyaṃ

<u>केचित्</u> **कारयेद्** इति ऋत्विजो ऽपि संबन्धम् आहुः । गृहीत्वा दक्षिणां वाधिकां दद्यात् स्वयम् अशक्नुवन् । प्राग् दक्षिणाभ्यः शेषकर्मसमापने यजमान एवाधिक्रियते ॥ ८.२०७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The sacrificial fees are paid at the ‘Mid-day Extraction’; if a priest
gives up his work after that, the fee paid to him shall not be refunded;
he ‘*should receive it*’—*i.e*., he should not be made to refund it.

The work should be completed by the sacrificer, through another person,
paying him an additional fee. This has been added with a view to
preclude the following notion—“Everything in connection with sacrifices
should be done by *priests*,—persons become *priests* when they have
been appointed as such,—this appointment can be made only at the
prescribed time, which is before the commencement of the performance, so
that if an appointment were to be made during the performance, it would
become defective,—and yet the performance has got to be finished,—and if
it has to be finished in a defective form, I shall get only those
details performed which can be done by the priests other than the one
who has gone away.” The sense is that only that much of deficiency has
to be admitted as cannot be avoided; and every little detail that can he
done should be done.

Some people have held that the verb ‘should be got done’ is to be
construed with the ‘priest’; the meaning being that the sacrificer shall
pay to the remaining priests higher fees and get the abandoned work done
by them, if he cannot do it himself; but, as before the payment of the
final fee, the burden of finishing the performance rests with the
sacrificer.—(207)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kārayet*’—‘The sacrificer should have it done by another priest’
(Medhātithi);—‘the defaulting priest should have it done by another
(Nārāyaṇa, Kullūka, Rāghavānanda and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 837);—in *Paraśāramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 222), which explains ‘*anyena*’ as ‘by some from among
that group of priests to which he himself belongs’;—in *Vivādaratnākara*
(p. 118);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 49), which says—‘if the priest leaves
his work after, having received the fee after the midday rites, then he
is to return the entire fee, and get the work completed by his son or
others’;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (89b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.265).—(See under 206.)

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 120).—‘After a Priest has been
appointed, if the sacrificer appoint another, the fee shall be paid to
the former; if he happen to go out for some time, then his return shall
be awaited, and the sacrificer shall not go on with the performance
during his absence. If the completion of the performance becomes urgent,
he may have it completed; and on his return, the priest may be given
some fee.’

*Nārada* (3.8-11).—‘When an officiating priest has met with an accident,
another priest shall officiate for him, and receive from him his part of
the fee. Where an officiating priest forsakes a sacrificer, who is no
offender and is free from guilt,—or when a sacrificer forsakes a
faultless priest,—they shall both be punished. There are three sorts of
officiating priests: hereditary, appointed by the sacrificer himself,
and one who performs the priestly functions of his own accord, through
friendship; the above law applies to the hereditary and appointed
priests; no sin attaches to the forsaking of the priest acting of his
own accord.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

दक्षिनादानाद् ऊर्ध्वं तेषां स्वकर्माकुर्वतां कारणान्तरतो न प्रत्याहरणीया दक्षिणास् तेभ्यः । अकुर्व[तां यान्]य् औपर्तिष्टानि कर्माणि अन्येनैव च कारयेत् तानि तत्पुरुषेण वान्येन वा, परिशिष्टकर्मानुरूपं यत् किंचिद् दत्त्वा, इतरथा ह्य् अपरिजितं दक्षिणया तत्कर्मयजमानार्थं न स्यात् । इदम् एव शास्त्रं परिशिष्टकर्मानुष्ठातुर् दक्षिणादाने विज्ञेयम् । अनेन च प्रसङ्गेनेदम् अपरं तद्गतम् एवोच्यते ॥ ८.२०६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

207	But he who abandons his work after the sacrificial fees have been given, shall obtain his full share and cause to be performed (what remains) by another (priest).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/208_yasmin_karmaNi.md">
<details open><summary><h3>208 यस्मिन् कर्मणि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यस्मिन् कर्मणि यास् तु स्युर्  
उक्ताः प्रत्यङ्गदक्षिणाः ।  
स एव ता आदिदीत  
भजेरन् सर्व एव वा  ॥ ८.२०८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/208_yasmin_karmaNi.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In connection with a rite, when specific fees are prescribed for its several parts,—will one man take all these, or shall they all share them?
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

इदं अपरं प्रकृतोपयोगि वैदिकं कथ्यते । वैदिके कर्मणि सामस्त्येन दक्षिणा आम्नायन्ते, न प्रतिपुरुषं विभागेन- "तस्य द्वादशशतं दक्षिणा" इति । तच् चातिदेशेन[^३०] क्रत्वन्तराणि तद्विकाराण्य् अनुगच्छन्ति राजसूयादीनि । तत्र च केषुचिद् अङ्गकर्मसु प्रतिपदम् अन्या दक्षिणाम्नाता पुरुषविशेषसंयोगेन- "हिरण्मयौ प्राकाशव् अध्वर्यवे"[^३१] (शब् ओन् प्म्स् १०.३.६३) इत्यादि । ताः **प्रत्यङ्गदक्षिणाः** संपद्यन्ते । किम् अध्वर्योश् चातुर्विद्यवादिकवद्[^३२] ददातिसंबन्धः, सर्वेषाम् ऋत्विजां दक्षिणाः, अध्वर्यस् तु द्वारमात्रम्, उत तस्यैव सा, अन्येषां प्रकृतांशः इति[^३३] संशयोपन्यासार्थः श्लोकः । प्रतिपदं पुरुषविसेषाश्रया अङ्गेषु दक्षिणाः **प्रत्यङ्गदक्षिणाः** । अथ वा वीप्सायां **प्रत्यङ्ग्**अशब्दः । अङ्गम् अङ्गम् आश्रिताः **प्रत्यङ्गाः** । **स एष ता आददीत** । मुख्य एव पुरुषस्य ददातिना संयोग उत कर्तृत्वाविशेषाद् अन्ये ऽपि **भजेरंल्** लभेरन्, प्रधानदक्षिणाया इव, इति कथयित्वा प्रश्नः । पुरुषविशेषम् उक्तास् तदर्था एवेति निर्णयः । एवं ददातिर् मुख्यार्थो भवति । पुरुषसंयोगश् च नादृष्टार्थः[^३४] ॥ ८.२०८ ॥


[^३४]:
     M G omit: iti kathayitvā praśnaḥ, and place puruṣaviśeṣam . . . nādṛṣṭārthaḥ at the beginning of the commentaroy on verse 209.


[^३३]:
     M G DK omit: iti


[^३२]:
     M G J: cāturvidyāvādikavad


[^३१]:
     M G: hiraṇmaye prakāśavadavayava ityādi; J: "hiraṇmaye prakāśavadadhvaryave" ityādi


[^३०]:
     M G: tac ced ekena; DK: taccodakena
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse adds something more in connection with Vedic rites, which is
relevant to the present context.

In connection with rites, fees are as a rule proscribed for them as a
whole, and not with reference to each priest,—the injunction being in
the form ‘the fee for it shall he twelve hundred’; this same injunction
becomes applicable by ‘transference’ also to such sacrifices as grow out
of, and are analogous to, that in connection with which the fee has been
prescribed;—such sacrifices, for instance, as the *llājasūya* and the
rest;—now in connection with these latter, it is found that with
reference to certain parts of the rite, distinct speciñc fees have been
prescribed as to be paid to a particular priest specifically,—*e.g*.,
‘the bright gold shall be given *to the Adhvaryu*’;—these are what are
called (in the text) ‘*specific fees for its several parts*.’

Now the question arises—Is the gift, like the other sacrificial fees,
connected with the *Adhvaryu*, only in the sense that he is one among
four partners, and it belongs to all the priests, the *Adhraryu* being
only the channel? or that it belongs to the *Adhvaryu* alone, the others
receiving a share only out of the main fee?

This is the question propounded by the verse.

The term ‘*pratyaṅgadakṣiṇā*’ means *the fees directly prescribed in so
many words in connection with special rites as to be given to particular
persons*. Or the term ‘*pratyaṅga*’ may mean *for* *each several part*.

‘*Will one man take all these*,’—the gift being connected with the chief
priest only,—or shall others all ‘*share them*,’—those, equally with the
chief priest, having officiated at the performance;—just as they do in
the case of the main sacrificial fee?—Such is the sense of the question.

The answer to this is that when a certain fee has been prescribed for a
particular person, it is to be taken by him alone: as it is only thus
that the prescribed act of ‘giving’ could he regarded as fulfilled. The
mention of the particular recipient in the rule could not be intended to
serve any transcendental purpose (and no other purpose could it serve,
if the fee were not actually meant to be received by that person
alone).—(208)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 119) which adds the
following notes:—‘*Praiyaṃśadakṣiṇāḥ*’ (which is its reading for
‘*pratyaṅgadakṣināḥ*’), the fees that have been prescribed for a
particular priest, in connection with particular sections of an
elaborate sacrifice; *e.g*., at the ceremony of anointment two golden
vessels are given to the *Adhvaryu* priest;—in regard to these, the
question is—Is the whole of that special fee to be taken by that one
priest in reference to whom it has been prescribed? Or that individual
is only the formal recipient, and the fee has to be equally divided
among all the priests taking part in the performance?

It is quoted in *Kṛtyakalapataru* (90a), which explains
‘*pratyaṃśadakṣiṇā*’ (which is its reading for ‘*pratyaṅgadakṣiṇā*’) as
‘the fees that have been prescribed as the special shares of particular
priests’, and it adds that this rule is meant to raise the question
whether when, *e.g*., two gold Prakāśas are prescribed as to be given at
the *Abhiṣecanīya Rites, to the Adhvaryu*,—are the two articles to be
taken by that priest, or are they to be divided among all the priests
concerned?
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 120).—(Same as Manu).

*Bṛhaspati* (Aparārka, p. 837).—(Same as Manu).
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रत्यङ्गदक्षिणाः सर्वदा संशय्यन्ते । किम् अमीषाम् ऋत्विजां प्रतिग्रहनियमश् चातुर्विद्यविनियुक्तपादिकब्राह्मणवत्, उत पदार्थस्वरूपस्वाभाव्यात् तदर्थेनेति न्यायविकल्पो ऽनूद्यते । तादर्थ्यपक्षं चाश्रित्यैतद् अधुनोच्यते ॥ ८.२०७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

208	But if (specific) fees are ordained for the several parts of a rite, shall he (who performs the part) receive them, or shall they all share them?
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/209_rathaM_haret.md">
<details open><summary><h3>209 रथं हरेत् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

रथं हरेत् चाऽध्वर्युर्  
ब्रह्माधाने च वाजिनम् ।  
होता वापि हरेद् अश्वम्  
उद्गाता चाऽप्य् अनः क्रये  ॥ ८.२०९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/209_rathaM_haret.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

At Fire-laying, the Adhvaryu shall take the chariot, and the Brahman the horse; or the Hotṛ shall take the house: and the Udgātṛ shall take the cart at the Soma-purchase.—(209)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**रथम् अध्वर्युर् आधाने हरेत्** । **ब्रह्मा च वाजिनं** वेगवन्तम् अश्वम् । **होता वा अश्वं** वृषम् अन्यं वा । कासुचिच् छाकास्व् आधान एता दक्षिणाः । अतः सोम**क्रये** यच् छकटं तद् उद्गातुः । तत्र शकटे ऽन्यतरो ऽनड्वान् युक्तः स्यात्, अन्यतरो वियुक्त इत्य् अपि पठ्यते । तेन च सोमः क्रीत उपाह्रियते । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये त्व् अपूर्वम् **अन** आहुर् न सोमोपाहरणार्थम्, न हि क्रयेण शक्यते विशेषयितुम् ॥ ८.२०९ ॥

_एवं तावत् पुरुषविशेषसंयोगिनीनाम् अङ्गदक्षिणानां विधिर् उक्तः । प्रधानदक्षिणानां सामान्यतः श्रुतानां इदानीं विभागम् आह ।_
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

At the rite of Fire-laying the *Adhvaryu* shall take the chariot; and
the *Brahman* or the *Hotṛ* shall take the swift horse.

In certain rescensional texts, these form the ‘sacrificial fee’ for the
rite of Fire-laying.

At, the rite of ‘Soma-purchase,’ there is a cart, which is to be taken
by the *Udgātṛ*. To this cart one calf is yoked, and another unyoked:
and it is on this cart that the purchased *Soma* is carried. Others hold
that the rites laid down in connection with the ‘purchase of Soma’ have
some transcendental purpose, and their use does not lie only in the
obtaining of the *Soma*; because there is no new character produced in
the *Soma* by its being purchased in the peculiar manner prescribed.

This verse has described how the fees prescribed in connection with the
subsidiary details are to be distributed among the several persons
concerned; the next verse is going to describe the rule concerning the
distribution of the sacrificial fee prescribed in connection with all
rites in general.—(209)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 120), which adds the
following notes:—For the followers of certain recensions it is laid down
in connection with the fire-kindling rites that the Adhvaryu is to
receive the chariot the Brāhmaṇa priest a swift horse, the Udgātṛ
priest, the cart in which the Soma is carried.—‘*Kraye*’ means at the
purchase of Soma.—Hence the answer to the question raised in the
preceding verse is that the special fee prescribed for a particular
priest is to be given to that priest only; as it is only thus that the
‘*giving*’ would be done in its real sense; the mention of the priests
in the texts prescribing the fees could not but be for this perceptible
purpose; while in any other case such naming would have to be taken only
as serving some transcendental purpose.

This verse is quoted also in *Parāśaramādhava*, (Vyavahāra, p. 221), to
the effect that it is only the general fee prescribed in connection with
the performance as a whole that it is to be divided among the
priests,—not so the special fee prescribed in connection with a
particular priest, who alone is to receive this latter fee;—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (90a), which says that this answers the question raised
in the preceding verse, the answer being that wherever the texts
prescribe a certain article as to be given to a particular person, it
has to be given to that person only.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 120).—(Same as Manu).

*Bṛhaspati* (Aparārka, p. 837).—(Same as Manu).
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

क्रतौ नानाशाखास्व् अवस्थितानाम् अङ्गदक्षिणानां बह्वीनां प्रदर्शनार्थः श्लोकः । एवं तावद् आधाने प्रधानर्त्विग्दक्षिणा अनः सोमिकेष्व् अपि ॥ ८.२०८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

209	The Adhvaryu priest shall take the chariot, and the Brahman at the kindling of the fires (Agnyadhana) a horse, the Hotri priest shall also take a horse, and the Udgatri the cart, (used) when (the Soma) is purchased.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/210_sarveShAm_ardhino.md">
<details open><summary><h3>210 सर्वेषाम् अर्धिनो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सर्वेषाम् अर्धिनो मुख्यास्  
तदर्धेनाऽर्धिनो ऽपरे ।  
तृतीयिनस् तृतीयांशाश्  
चतुर्थांशाश् च पादिनः  ॥ ८.२१० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/210_sarveShAm_ardhino.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

From among all, the chief men shall receive half; the next shall receive half of that; the ‘thirders’ the third part and the ‘fourthers’ the fourth part of it.—(210)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सर्वेषाम्** ऋत्विजां ये **मुख्यास्** ते **ऽर्धिनः** । यावती तस्मिन् क्रतौ सामस्त्येन दक्षिणाम्नाता तस्यास् ते ऽर्धिनो ऽर्द्धहराः । सोमयागेषु हि षोडसर्त्विजस् तत्र चत्वारो मुख्या होताध्वर्युर् ब्रह्मोद्गातेति । तेषाम् अर्धं तस्य द्वादशशतं दक्षिणेति ततो ऽर्धं षट्पञ्चाशत्[^३५] । **तदर्धेन**[^३६] अष्टाविंशत्य्**आर्धिनस्** तद्वन्तो **ऽपरे**, येषां ततो ऽनन्तरं वरणम् आम्नातं मैत्रावरुणप्रतिप्रस्थातृब्राह्मणाच्छंसिप्रस्तोतारः[^३७] । **तृतीयिनः**[^३८]** तृतीयांशाः** । अंशशब्दो ऽर्धशब्देन समानार्थो ऽर्धशब्दश् च नावश्यं[^३९] समप्रविभाग एव, किंचिन् न्यूने ऽधिके ऽपि सामीप्येन वर्तते । तेन तृतीयो भागः षट्पञ्चाशतः षोडश गृह्यन्ते । एकैकस्य चतस्रो भवन्ति । समस् तृतीयं[^४०] भागं प्रयच्छन्ति षट्पञ्चाशतस् तृतीयं च होतुर् अच्छावाकः । अध्वर्योर् नेष्टा । ब्रह्मणोऽग्नीत् उद्गातुः प्रतिहर्ता । ये च **पादिनस्** ते चतुर्थं भागं कर्मणः कुर्वन्तीति पादिनः । चतुर्थे च स्थाने मैत्रावरुणस्थानान्ते । **चतुर्थांशाः** । द्वादशसमुदाये पूर्ववत् । एवं "तं शतेन दीक्षयन्ति" इत्य् अत्रापि कॢप्तिः कर्तव्या । "अर्धिनो दीक्षयति, पादिनो दीक्षयति" इत्य् एवमादिभिः शब्दैः । तत्र द्वादशक्रमविधिर् एव । अन्यत्र श्रुतो व्यवहार इहापि तयैव रीत्या कृत इति ॥ ८.२१० ॥


[^४०]:
     M G: samatṛtīyaṃ


[^३९]:
     M G: 'rdhaśabdas tv anāvaśyaṃ


[^३८]:
     M G: tṛtīyena


[^३७]:
     M G: -prastotās


[^३६]:
     M G: tardhino


[^३५]:
     M G: ṣaṭpañcāśan na
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

From among the priests, ‘*the chief ones receive half*’; *i.e*., they
receive half of the fee that is prescribed for the rite as a whole.

At the *Soma-sacrifice* there are sixteen priests; of these the chief
ones are four: the *Hotṛ*, the *Adhvaryu*, the *Brahman* and the
*Udgātṛ*, and these receive one half of the total fee;—the total fee
being *one hundred and twelve*, fifty-six go to these four men.

Half of this, that is *twenty-eight*, go to the ‘*next*’; *i.e*., those
four whose appointment comes after that of the four mentioned above;
*i.e*., the *Maitrāvaruṇa*, the *Pratiprasthātṛ*, the *Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin*
and the *Prastotṛ*.

The ‘*thirders*’ receive the ‘*third part*.’—The term ‘part’ here is
synonymous with ‘half’; the term ‘half’ does not always stand for two
equal divisions; it is used also in reference to what is very near such
equal divisions; hence the ‘*third part*’ of ‘*fifty-six*’ is understood
to be *sixteen*; so that each of these four *gets four*.

Some people take the ‘third part’ as such that of the total fee; when
others take it as that of *fifty-six*.

The four ‘thirders’ are—the *Acchāvāka*, associated with the *Hotṛ*, the
*Neṣṭṛ* connected with the *Adhvaryu*, the *Agnīd* with the *Brahman*,
and the *Pratihartṛ* with the *Udgātṛ*.

The ‘*Fourthers*’—*i.e*., so called because they perform the *fourth*
part of the rite, and also because they occupy the fourth place from the
*Maitrāvaruṇa*— receive ‘*the fourth part*’—*i.e*., *twelve*—of the
whole; this number being got at in the same manner as before.

This same method of distribution is to be employed also in the case of
the rite of Initiation, where the fee is laid down as ‘a hundred’; where
also the ‘halfers’ and ‘fourthers’ help in the performance.

The practice, that, we have found prescribed elsewhere we have described
in connection with the present text also.—(210)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

The total fee being 112, the shares are 56, 28, 16, 12 (Medhātithi);—the
total being 100, the shares are 48, 24, 16, 12 (Rāghavānanda, Nārāyaṇa
and Kullūka); \[Buhler wrongly puts the last figure as 8\];—the total
fee shall be divided into 25 shares and the several classes shall
receive 12, 6, 4 and 3 respectively.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 118), which adds the
following notes:—At the *Jyotiṣṭoma*, 100 cows have been laid down as
the fee for the 16 priests; and the present rule prescribes what part of
it is to be given to which priest; the four ‘principal’ priests—*e.g*.,
the *Hotṛ*, *Adhvaryu Brahman* and *Udgātṛ*—are ‘*ardhinaḥ*’, *entitled
to one half*; with a view to the total available, this ‘one half must be
understood to be 48; so that 48 cows are to be given to the principal
priests’;—the next class, consisting of the *Maitrāvaruṇa*,
*Pratiprasthātṛ*, *Brāhmaṇacchaṃsi* and *Prastotṛ* are to receive half
of the ‘half-sharers’, *i.e*., 24 cows have to be given to these;—the
next class, consisting of the *Acchāvāka*, *Neṣṭr*, *Agnīdhra* and
*Pratihartṛ*, are entitled to a third part of the ‘half-sharers’; so
that they are to receive 16 cows;—the last class consisting of the
*Grāvastotṛ*, *Netṛ*, *Potṛ* and *Subrahmaṇya*, are to receive a quarter
of the ‘half-sharers’; so that these receive 12 cows.—This division, it
adds, his based upon the text ‘*ardhino dīkṣayati*’ which actually names
the priests ‘*ardhinaḥ*,’ ‘half-sharers’, and so forth.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.265), which lays down the same
classification and division as the *Vivādaratnākara*. It raises the
following question:—“This division cannot be acceptable, as we find
neither any convention to the effect, nor is the fee of the nature of
capital jointly raised, nor is there any Vedic text actually prescribing
such shares. So that, under the circumstances, the most equitable
division would be that every one should receive an equal share,
according to the rule laid down in *Mīmāṃsā-sūtra*—‘*Samam syāt
aśrutatvāt*’, ‘it must be equal, as nothing else has been directly
prescribed’; or that each one should receive what is due to him in
consideration of the work actually done by him.”—It answers this
objection as follows:—Unless we accept the division suggested, we cannot
account for the names ‘*ardhinaḥ*’ (half sharers), ‘*Tṛtīyinaḥ*’ (third
sharers), and ‘*Pādinaḥ*’(quarter sharers), which we find in a text in
connection with the *Dvādaśāha* sacrifice, which has the *Jyotiṣṭoma*
for its archetype; these names would be meaningless if they were not
taken as indicating the share of the priests in the sacrificial fee.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 837), which adds that though the first
class of priests gets only 48, which is not quite *half* of *100*, yet
it is very close to it; hence they may be called ‘Half sharers’; it has
the same division as in *Mitākṣarā*.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 739);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (90a),
which adds the following explanation:—‘*Sarveṣām*’, among the sixteen
priests engaged in the sarcrifice, out of the 100 cows, the prescribed
sacrificial fee, one half is to go to the principal priests, *viz*.,
Hotṛ, Brāhmaṇa, Adhvaryu and Udgātṛ; even though they may receive a
little less than the exact one half, they may be called ‘*ardhinaḥ*’,
‘Halfers’; the second set, consisting of the Maitrāvaruṇa,
Brāhmaṇacchaṃsin, Pratiprasthātṛ and Prastotṛ, are entitled to half of
what is received by the former set; the third set, consisting of the
*Acchāvāka*, *Agnīdhra*, *Neṣtṛ* and *Pratihartṛ*, receive the third
part of what is received by the first set;—and the fourth set,
consisting of the *Grāvastut*, *Netṛ*, *Unnetṛ* and *Subrahmaṇya*,
receive the fourth part of what is received by the first set.
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

"ताञ् छतेन दाक्षयन्ति" इति वचनाद् अष्टचत्वारिंशद् भवन्तीति । एवं तदर्धाद् इव संख्यानिर्देश उत्तरत्र समर्थो भवति । तेन्**आर्धिनो** ऽध्वर्युब्रह्मोद्गातृहोतारो **मुख्या** ऋत्विजो भवन्ति । तदर्धेन चतुर्विंशत्या **अर्धिनो ऽपरे** उक्तेभ्यो द्वितीयस्थानं प्रतिप्रस्थातृमैत्रावरुणब्राह्मणाच्छंसिप्रस्तोतारः । एवं च कात्यायनः "षत् षत् द्वितीयेभ्यः" वक्ति । **तृतीयिनः** तृतीयं स्थानं येषां त इमे तृतियिनः, तृतीयांशाः । समुदायेन षोडश पशुभाजः । कात्यायनो ऽपि चैवम् एव वक्ति- "चतस्रश् चतस्रस् तृतीयेभ्यः" इति । प्रत्येकं चतुर्थ अंशो येषां त इमे **चतुर्थांशाः** समुदायतो द्वादशपशुभाजः **पादिनो** भवन्ति । कात्यायनो ऽपि "तिस्रस् तिस्र इतरेभ्यः" । आद्यसंख्यापेक्षया पाद एषाम् अस्तीति **पादिनः** । चतुर्थस्थाना उच्यन्ते । स्थाने स्थानिनां व्यपदेशो ऽयम् । **चतुर्थांश**शब्दस् तु भागकल्पकः समासपदेन । तथा चोक्तम्, विपर्ययेण वैतद् व्याख्येयम् । उभवनिर्देशश् चात्र पादपूरणार्थो विज्ञेयः । यद्य् अप्य् अन्यतरस्माद् उभयार्थप्रतीतिः अयं सर्वो विधिर् न्यायश्रुतिसिद्धो दृष्टान्तत्वेनेहोपादीयते । यथा संभूयैकं कर्म सहकुर्वतां दृष्टा गुरुलघुताम् अवक्ष्यानवेक्ष्य वा वचनसामर्थ्याद् विषमांशप्रकॢप्तिः । एवम् — ॥ ८.२०९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

210	The (four) chief priests among all (the sixteen), who are entitled to one half, shall receive a moiety (of the fee), the next (four) one half of that, the set entitled to a third share, one third, and those entitled to a fourth a quarter.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/211_sambhUya_svAni.md">
<details open><summary><h3>211 सम्भूय स्वानि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

संभूय स्वानि कर्माणि  
कुर्वद्भिर् इह मानवैः ।  
अनेन विधियोगेन  
कर्तव्यांशप्रकल्पना  ॥ ८.२११ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/211_sambhUya_svAni.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Among men carrying on their business jointly, the allotment of shares should be done by the application of these principles.—(211)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यथा यज्ञे यो बहूनि कर्माणि कायक्लेशकरणे विद्वत्तातिशयसाध्ये च नियुक्तो भूयसीं दक्षिणां लभते न्यूनकर्मकारी तु न्यूनां तद्वल् लौकिकेषु गृहचैत्यादिकारिषु **संभूय** संहत्य वर्धकिस्थपतिसूत्रधारादिषु स्वसमयप्रसिद्धो यावान् अंशः सूत्रधारस्य यावान् स्थपतेस् तत्र्**आनेन** **विधियोगेन** । विधिर् वैदिको ऽर्थस् तत्प्रसिद्धा व्यवस्था विधियोगेन वैदिक्या[^४१] यज्ञगतया व्यवस्थयेत्य् अर्थः । एवं नाटकादिप्रेक्षायां नर्तनगायनवादकेषु भागप्रकॢप्तिः । यद्य् अपि सर्वे विद्वांसः सर्वकर्मानुष्ठानशक्ताश् च तथापि कर्मानुरूप्येण भागो न पुरुषानुरूप्येणेति संभूयसमुत्थानम् ॥ ८.२११ ॥


[^४१]:
     M G: vidhiyogavaidikyā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the sacrificial performance, the man who does the most laborious
parts of the work and is employed to do what demands much effort,
receives a larger fee, and he who does the easier parts receives loss;
similarly among ordinary workmen also, those, *e.g*., employed in the
building of houses and temples,—when they do the work ‘jointly,’ as
among the architect, the mason and the carpenter.—their several shares
shall be alloted ‘*by* *the application* *of* *these
principles*’;—‘principle’ is *rule* laid down in the *Veda*, hence this
phrase means ‘according to the rule laid down in the Veda in connection
with sacrificial performances.’

Similarly in the producing of a drama, and such other business, the
shares are to ho alloted among the dancers, the singers and the players
of musical instruments.

Even though everyone of the persons concerned may be well versed in the
science and quite capable of doing all the work, yet the shares are to
be alloted in accordance with the work that is actually done by each,
and according to the character of the man concerned.

Thus ends the treatment of ‘Joint Concerns.’—(211)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 221), which
remarks that this distribution pertains to only cases where the thing to
be divided is mentioned as common to all;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (90a);—and
in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 119b), which says that this refers, *not*
to the fee that is prescribed for individual priests, but to the *common
fee* of 1200 cows, which is prescribed for all the officiating priests.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.259).—‘Among traders carrying on a joint concern for
profit, their profit and loss shall be commensurate with the share of
capital contributed by each.’

*Nārada* (3.1-3).—When traders or others carry on business jointly, it
is called *Partnership*. When several partners are jointly carrying on
business for the purpose of profit, the contribution of funds towards
the common stock of the association shall form the basis of their
undertakings. Therefore let each contribute his proper share. The loss,
expenses and profit of each partner are either equal to those of other
partners or exceed them, or remain below them, according as his share is
equal to theirs, or greater or less.’

*Bṛhaspati* (14.3).—‘As an equal, smaller, or larger share of the joint
stock has been contributed by a partner, in the same proportion shall he
defray charges, perform labour and obtain profit.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.614-618).—‘Those who deal in gold, grains and liquids,
jointly, will have the earnings according to the amount of their share,
greater, equal or less. Whatever portion has been stipulated
beforehand,—equal, less or greater,—that shall he accepted. Expenditure
he shall pay and do the labour also proportionately, and take the profit
also in the same manner.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एकस्मिन् गृहकरणादौ सूत्रकारवधकिस्थपत्यादीनां गुरुलघुताम् अवक्ष्यानवेक्ष्य वा यथास्मरणं **कर्तव्यांशप्रकल्पना** । न ह्य् अशिल्पेषु व्यवहारेषु वा मनुष्याणां तुल्यता शक्या ग्रहीतुम् । अदत्तानपकर्म[वर्]णार्थम् इदम् आह — ॥ ८.२१० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

211	By the application of these principles the allotment of shares must be made among those men who here (below) perform their work conjointly.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/212_dharmArthaM_yena.md">
<details open><summary><h3>212 धर्मार्थं येन ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

धर्मार्थं येन दत्तं स्यात्  
कस्मै चिद् याचते धनम् ।  
पश्चाच् च न तथा तत् स्यान्  
न देयं तस्य तद् भवेत्  ॥ ८.२१२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/212_dharmArthaM_yena.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When a man gives money, for a pious purpose, to another who asks for it,—if, subsequently, it is not used for that purpose, then, it shall not be given to him.—(212)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यः कश्चिद् आह "सान्तानिको ऽहम्, यियक्षुर् वा, देहि मे किंचित्" इति । तस्मै यदि **दत्तं** भवेत्, स च न यजेत न विवाहकर्मणि प्रवर्तेत । तद्धनं द्यूतेन वेश्याभिर् वा क्षपयेद् अन्यत्र वा विनियुञ्जीत वृद्धिलाभकृष्यादौ, न देयं तस्य । तद्दत्तस्य दानप्रतिषेधो नोपपद्यते । अतः प्रत्याहरणीयम् इति वाक्यार्थः । अथ वा दत्तान्तो[^४२] गौणो व्याख्येयः- दत्तं प्रतिश्रुतं न देयम् । तथा च गौतमः- "प्रतिश्रुत्याप्य् अधर्मसंयुक्ताय न दद्यात्" (ग्ध् ५.२३) । किं पुनर् अत्र युक्तम् । उभयम्[^४३] इत्य् आह- दत्तस्य प्रत्याहरणं प्रतिश्रुतस्य वादानम् । तथा च स्मृत्यन्तर उभयं पठितम् । आह हि नारदः- "कर्ताहम् एतत् कर्म" इति उपक्रम्य " यद् दत्तं स्याद् अविज्ञानाद् अदत्तं तद् अपि स्मृतम्" (न्स्म् ४.९–१०) इति । प्रयोजनविशेषोद्देशेन यद् दत्तं तस्मिन्न् अनिर्वर्त्यमाने[^४४] व्यवस्थितम्[^४५] अपि प्रतिग्रहीतुर् गृहाद् आहर्तव्यम् । दानस्योपक्रममात्रं तदानीं समर्पणं समाप्तिस् तु निर्वृत्ते प्रयोजनेति[^४६] नारदस्य मतम् ॥ ८.२१२ ॥


[^४६]:
     M G: nirvartaprayojaneti; J: nirvṛttaprayojaneti


[^४५]:
     M G: svavasthitam


[^४४]:
     M G DK: anivartyamāne


[^४३]:
     M G: upāyam


[^४२]:
     M G DK (1: 795): naṣṭānto; DK in parentheses: (naḥ ktāntaḥ)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

A man comes to the rich man praying—‘I am desirous of marrying for the
sake of issue,’ or ‘I wish to perform such and such a sacrifice,’ ‘give,
me some money’;—and the money is given to him;—but the man does not
marry, and spends the money either in gambling or over prostitutes, or
for something else, laying it out on interest or agriculture,—then ‘*it
shall not be given to him*.’

When the money has been given already, there can be no sense in
forbidding the gift; (A) hence the sentence should be taken to mean that
‘it shall be taken back from him.’ (B) Or the former clause itself may
be taken in a figurative sentence,—the word ‘*gives*’ being taken in the
sense of ‘promises’; the meaning in this case would be that ‘the
promised money shall not be given.’ In this sense we have the assertion
of Gautama (5.23)—‘Even after promising, no money shall be given to one
who is found to be unrighteous.’

“Of these two explanations (A & B), which is the more reasonable?”

Both are reasonable: the taking back of what has been given, and also
not giving what has been promised. In another *Smṛti* -text we find both
these courses laid down:—Beginning with the words—‘I am going to perform
such and such an act,’ the text goes on to say—‘what is given in
ignorance is as good as not given’ *Nārada*, 4.10-11). This means that
when money has been given for a certain act, if that act is not done,
the money, even though paid, shall ho brought back from the receiver’s
house; and the opinion of Nārada is that in this case there was only a
*promise* of the gift, and its fulfilment would be dependent upon the
actual fulfilment of the purpose for which it had been asked for.—(212)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kartāhametat karmeti*’—(Medhātithi, p. 1009, l. 5).—The text of Nārada
(4.10-11) is—‘*Kartāhametat karmeti pratilābhecchayā ca yat Apātre
pātramityukte kārye vā dharmasaṃhite Yaddattam syādavijñānādadattam
tadapi smṛtam*.’

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 137), which explains the
meaning to be—‘If the man begs money for the performance of a pious act,
but having got it, he does not do the act, then the gift should be
recovered from him.’

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 348), to the effect that when
money has been given to a Brāhmaṇa who has begged it for the purpose of
performing a sacrifice or some such act,—but he does not do such an
act,—then the money is to be taken back from him;—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (94a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Ārthaśāstra* (6.94).—‘In some cases the resumption of a gift is
permitted; if one has given away his entire property, or his wife and
son, or his own self, it should be restored to him; if a gift has been
promised to a certain person under the impression that he is deserving
of it, it may be resumed on his being found to be undeserving; u (?) if
a gift was promised to a man for the purpose of helping him in the
carrying on of such meritorious work as the tending of cows and the
like, it may be resumed if he is found to be using it in stealing,
adultery and such acts; if it has been promised to a man under the
impression that he has rendered help to the giver, it may be resumed if
the man is found either to have done him no good or to have actually
done him harm; if a gift has been promised by virtue of certain special
qualifications in the recipient, it may be resumed if he is not found to
possess those qualifications. Clever judges shall permit such resumption
of gifts in such a manner as neither the giver nor the recipient may be
hit hard.’

*Nārada* (14.4 *et seq*.).—‘A deposit, a pledge, joint property, a son,
wife, the entire property of one having offspring, and what has been
promised to another man:—these have been declared to be inalienable by
one even in the worst plight...... The price paid for merchandise,
wages, a present offered for amusement, a gift made from affection, or
from gratitude, or for sexual intercourse with a woman, and a respectful
gift,—these are valid gifts. The following are invalid gifts: what has
been given under the influence of fear, anger, hatred, sorrow or pain;
or as a bribe, or in jest, or fraudulently, under false pretences; or by
a child, or by a fool, or by a person not bis own master, or by one
distressed, or by one intoxicated, or by one insane, or in consideration
of a reward, thinking *this man will do me some service*;— and so is
invalid what has been given from ignorance to an unworthy man thought to
be worthy, or for a purpose thought to be virtuous. The donee who covets
invalid gifts and accepts them through avarice,—and the donor of what
ought not to be given,—both deserve punishment.’

*Bṛhaspati* (16.2, 8-11).—‘That which may not be given is of eight
kinds: joint property, son, wife, pledges, one’s entire property, a
deposit, wealth, what has been borrowed for use and what has been
promised to another. The following eight are recognised as valid
gifts:—wages for pleasure derived, price of merchandise, fee paid to or
for a damsel, present to a benefactor, present through reverence,
kindness or affection. What has been given by one angry or resenting an
injury, or through inadvertence, or by one distressed, or by a junior,
mad man, a terrified person, one intoxicated or overaged, or outcast or
idiot, or one afflicted with grief or illness,—or what is given in
jest;—all these have been declared to be void gifts. When anything has
been given through desire for reward, or to an unworthy person mistaken
for a worthy one, or for an immoral purpose,—the donor may resume the
gift.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākāra, p. 129, p. 132, p. 135).—‘A man may give
away his entire property over and above what may be necessary for the
maintenance of his family, excepting his house. If a man has promised a
gift to a Brāhmaṇa of his own accord, if he refuses to give it he should
he made to pay it, and also pay the first amercement. A man may resume
what he may have given under the influence of love or anger, or when he
was not a free agent, or when he was distressed. Or one made by a
eunuch, an intoxicated person, or under a misapprehension, or in jest.
If a bribe has been promised for some work, it should never be given,
even if the work may be accomplished.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2-175, 176).—‘With the exception of the wife and son,
everything may he given away, in consonance with the interests of the
family; if a man has offspring, he should not give away his entire
property; nor may he give to one person what has been promised to
another. The acceptance of a gift should he public, specially in the
ease of immovable property; on having given or promised a gift, one
should not resume it.’

*Gautama* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 133).—‘Even though he may have promised a
gift, he shall not give it if the recipient is found to be unrighteous.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

स्वनिगदोपवर्णितः श्लोकः ॥ ८.२११ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

212	Should money be given (or promised) for a pious purpose by one man to another who asks for it, the gift shall be void, if the (money is) afterwards not (used) in the manner (stated).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/213_yadi_saMsAdhayet.md">
<details open><summary><h3>213 यदि संसाधयेत् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यदि संसाधयेत् तत् तु  
दर्पाल् लोभेन वा पुनः ।  
राज्ञा दाप्यः सुवर्णं स्यात्  
तस्य स्तेयस्य निष्कृतिः  ॥ ८.२१३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/213_yadi_saMsAdhayet.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If, through arrogance or greed, the man should seek to recover it, he should be made by the King to pay one gold-piece, as an expiation for that theft.—(213)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**संसाधनं** राजनिवेदनादिना ऋणवत् प्रतिश्रुतस्य मार्गणम्, स्वीकृतस्य प्रतियाच्यमानस्य राजनिवेदणम्- "अयं मह्यं दत्वा प्रतिजिहीर्षति" इति सिद्धस्य दृढीकरणं **संसाधनम्** एतत्[^४७] । **दर्पाल् लोभेनेति** कारणानुवादः । एवं कुर्वतो दण्डः **सुवर्णं स्यात् तस्य स्तेयस्य निष्कृतिर्** इति । चौरदण्डम् आशङ्कमानः[^४८] सुवर्णं विधत्ते । अचौरशङ्कया च दत्तं किल तेन तस्मै न स्वयं हृतं कथम् अयं चौरः स्याद् इति शङ्कां निवर्तयितुं स्तेयशब्दः प्रयुक्तः । सत्य् अपि चौरत्वे वाचनिकः सुवर्णदण्डो ऽन्यासु क्रियासु चौरवद् व्यवहर्तव्यः ॥ ८.२१३ ॥


[^४८]:
     M G: āśaṅkamānaṃ


[^४७]:
     M G J: etad etat
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Seeking to recover it*’—*i.e*., filing a suit before the King, with a
view to recover it in the manner of a debt;—when, on being asked to pay
back what he has already received, the man files an application before
the King, saying ‘Having given the money to me he seeks to take it away
from me’; the ‘recovering’ of the gift consisting, in this case, of its
being *confirmed*.—This is done cither ‘*through arrogance or
greed*’;—this describes the causes of the action mentioned before.

The penalty for the man who does this act shall be ‘*one
gold-piece*’;—‘*as an expiation for that theft*’;—lest people think that
the man, being regarded as a thief, should suffer the penalties
prescribed for theft, the author has laid down the penalty as ‘*one gold
piece*.’ And yet he has used the word ‘*theft*’ with a view to preclude
the notion that the man is not a ‘thief,’ since what he has taken was
given to him and he did not take it away himself. The meaning thus is
that, though the man is a ‘thief,’ yet his punishment, as here laid
down, shall consist of ‘one gold piece’ only, but in all other respects,
he is to be treated as a ‘thief.’—(213)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Saṃsādhayet*’—‘If he tries to enforce the fulfilment of the promise by
a complaint before the king’ (Medhātithi);—if he tries to obtain the
money forcibly or refuses to refund it’ (Kullūka, Rāghavānanda and
Govindarāja);—‘if he should withhold the repayment’ (Rāmacandra, who
reads ‘*Sandhārayet*’);—‘if the man should really perform the act for
which he had begged, then the man who had promised to pay, but did not
pay, (or having paid, took it back), should be made to pay to him a
*Suvarṇa*, by way of fine, for not fulfilling his promise’ (Nandana, who
has been misrepresented by Hopkins).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 137), which explains the
meaning to be—‘if, through annoyance or greed, he should accomplish the
purpose (*artham sādhayet*), then he should be fined by the king one
*Suvarṇa*.’

It is quoted also in *Aparārka* (p. 782), which adds the following
explanation:—‘If on being asked to refund, the man, through annoyance or
greed, does not refund the money, but complain before the king with a
view to establish the fact that the gift should not be taken back,—then
he should be forced to refund the money’;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (94a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 94).—‘If a gift is made under fright,—for fear of
punishment, or blame or calamity,—the man accepting the gift should be
punished as a thief;—so also one who offers and accepts a gift in anger
for the injuring of a third person.’

[(See texts under
212.)]
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

येन धर्मार्थं किंचित् प्रतिश्रुतं न तु दत्तम् । तं चेद् धर्मम् अकुर्वन् प्रतिश्रुतम् इति कृत्वा साधयेद् अदातारम्, ततो **राज्ञा सुवर्णं** स **दाप्यः** । सोपधं [याचितारः न स्तेयकारिणः, अन्यायकारित्वाद् उ]द्धृतदण्डास् त्व् इति ॥ ८.२१२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

213	But if the (recipient) through pride or greed tries to enforce (the fulfilment of the promise), he shall be compelled by the king to pay one suvarna as an expiation for his theft.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/214_dattasyaiShoditA_dharmyA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>214 दत्तस्यैषोदिता धर्म्या ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

दत्तस्यैषोदिता धर्म्या  
यथावद् अनपक्रिया ।  
अत ऊर्ध्वं प्रवक्ष्यामि  
वेतनस्याऽनपक्रियाम्  ॥ ८.२१४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/214_dattasyaiShoditA_dharmyA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Thus has been fully explained the lawful non-misappropriation of gifts; after this I am going to describe the ‘non-misappropriation of Wages.’—(214)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वेणार्धेन पूर्वविवादोपसंहारः । उत्तरेण वक्ष्यमाणोपक्रमः । **दत्तस्यैषानपक्रियोदिता** । **अपक्रिया** क्रियापायः । तस्य नञा प्रतिषेधः । दानम् एवं न चलितं भवति । एषैव दाने स्थितिर् इति यावत् । धर्माद् अनपेता **धर्म्या** । कथं प्रतिश्रुत्यादीयमाने धर्मो न पश्यतीति नैषा शङ्का कर्तव्या । एष एवात्र धर्मो यन् न दीयते दत्तं च प्रत्यादीयते । **उदिता** उक्ता । यथावच्छब्दसमुदाय एव याथातथ्ये वर्तते । सम्यङ्निरूपितेत्य् अर्थः । अथ वा यथाशब्दो योग्यतायां वर्तते- ताम् अर्हतीति वतिः कर्तव्यः । **वेतनं** भृतिः, तस्य्**आनपक्रिया** । वेतनेन स्वकर्म कुर्वतां यो धर्मः स इदानीम् उच्यत इति प्रतिज्ञा[^४९] ॥ ८.२१४ ॥


[^४९]:
     DK (1: 796) omits: vetanaṃ bhṛtiḥ . . . pratijñā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The first half sums up the foregoing Head of Dispute, and the second
introduces the next head.

‘*The non-misappropriation of gifts has been
explained*.’—‘*Misappropriation*’ is non-fulfilment; and it is the
negation of this that is expressed by the negative prefix; the sense
being that if the gift is resumed in the manner described above, it does
not mean its improper ‘misappropriation’; such is the rule of all gifts.

‘*Lawful*’—not against law.

“When the gift, after being promised, is not paid,—how does this not
militate against law?”

Such a question should not be raised. Since the right and lawful course
in the case is that it should not be paid, or if paid, it should be
taken hack.

‘*Explained*’—described.

‘*Yathāvat*,’ ‘*fully*’—*i.e*., in the right manner. The meaning is that
‘it has been expounded in the proper manner.’ Or the term ‘*yathā*’ may
be taken to mean *propriety*, so that ‘*yathāvat*’ would mean
*properly*.

‘*Wages*’— subsistence-allowance; and the ‘*non-misappropriation*’ of
this is going to be described. That is, what I am going to describe now
is the behaviour by which there is no improper misappropriation of duty
on the part of those who work on wages.—(214)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उपसंहारोपन्यासार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.२१४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

214	Thus the lawful subtraction of a gift has been fully explained; I will next propound (the law for) the non-payment of wages.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/215_bhRto_nArto.md">
<details open><summary><h3>215 भृतो नार्तो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

भृतो नार्तो न कुर्याद् यो  
दर्पात् कर्म यथोदितम् [मेधातिथिपाठः - अनार्तो] ।  
स दण्ड्यः कृष्णलान्य् अष्टौ  
न देयं चाऽस्य वेतनम्  ॥ ८.२१५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/215_bhRto_nArto.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a hireling, without being ill, does not perform the stipulated work, through arrogance,—he should be fined eight ‘Kṛṣṇalas,’ and should not receive his wages.—(215)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उद्दिष्टेन मूल्येनोद्दिष्टं कर्म करोति स इह **भृतो** ऽभिप्रेतः । भृत्यकर्मविशेषेण स्वीकृतो भृतः[^५०] । देहि मे पञ्चरूपकाणि, इदं ते कर्म कर्तास्मीयता कालेन" इत्य् आभाष्य प्रविष्टः, स चेत् कर्म न समापयति, **कृष्णलानि** सौवर्णानि ताम्ररजतयोर् वा कर्मस्वरूपम् अनुबन्धादि च ज्ञात्वा दण्ड्यते । तानि च रूपकाणि वेतनार्थं कल्पितानि न लभेत । यद्य् **अनार्तो दर्पान् न** करोति यथोदितं कर्म । व्याध्यादिनापीडितस्य दर्पाद् अकुर्वतो भृतिहानिर् दण्डनं च । अतः स एवं वक्तुं न लभते- "यावन् मया कर्मांशः कृतस् तदानुरूप्येण देहि" इति । 


[^५०]:
     J: bhṛtyaḥ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ऋत्विजाम् अप्य् एव दण्डं केचिद् इच्छन्ति स्वेच्छया त्यजताम् ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;तद् अयुक्तम् । अत्र हि महान् अनर्थो यजमानस्य सामिकृत्ये यजमाने ऽतो दण्डो महान् अत्र युक्तः । यजमानस्य च यन् नष्टं तद् दापनीयाः । दीक्षोपसद्देवव्रतैः शरीरापचये समुत्थातव्यम् । 

- अन्यो यः शिल्पी कंचन कर्मणि प्रवर्तयति तडागखनने देवस्य गृहकरणे "अहं ते समापयिता प्रवर्तस्व" इति, पश्चाच् चापसरेत् तेन स्वामिनः क्षयव्ययायासाः सर्वे संवोढव्याः, भाण्डवाहवणिग्न्यायेन । एष हि न्यायः कात्यायनेन सर्वत्रातिदिष्टः । भाण्डवाहकदोषेण वणिजो यदि द्रव्यं नश्येत् तद्भाण्डवाहको वहेत् । "यो वान्यः कस्यचित् कर्मणि धनम् आबध्यार्धतो निवर्तेत" इति कात्यायनीये सूत्रे धनम् आबध्यासज्य धनव्ययं करयित्वा यद्य् अर्धकृते निवर्तेत सो ऽपि तद् वहेद् इत्य् अनुषङ्गः । एवं यो ऽपि षाण्मस्यः सांवत्सरो वा यथोपपादककर्मकारी भक्तदासस् तस्याप्य् एष एव न्यायः । आह च नारदः ।

- कर्माकुर्वन् प्रतिश्रुत्य कार्यो दत्वा भृतिं बलात् ।

- भृतिं गृहीत्वाकुर्वाणो द्विगुणं भृतिम् आवहेत् ॥

- काले ऽपूर्णे त्यजन् कर्म भृतिनाशनम् अर्हति ॥ न्स्म् ६.५–६ ॥ ८.२१५ ॥

_अनार्तस्य दण्ड उक्तो भृतिहरणं च । आर्तस्येदानीम् उच्यते ।_
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The man who does a stipulated work for a stipulated amount of wages is
what is meant by the term ‘*hireling*’ here; *i.e*., the man who has
been engaged to do a certain service, and who has agreed to do it within
a definite time, if he is paid ‘five rupees’ (for instance), if such a
person does not finish the work, he should be fined eight ‘*kṛṣṇala*’—of
gold, or of silver, or of copper, in accordance with the nature of the
work and other circumstances; and he should not receive the said
*rupees*, which had been fixed as his wages.

But this applies to a case where the man is not ill, and omits to do the
stipulated work, ‘*through arrogance*.’ That is, the fine and the loss
of wages are to be inflicted only upon the man who is not suffering from
any illness, and who omits to do the work through sheer arrogance; so
that it is not open to the man to retort—‘Pay me an amount commensurate
with the labour already incurred by me.’

Some people hold that this same penalty is to be inflicted upon priests
who leave off their work at their own will.

But this is not right; in the case of a sacrificial performance, the
loss to the sacr ifi cer, caused by the rites being only half-done, is
very great, so that the penalty in this ease should also be heavy; all
that the sacrificer has lost should he made good, and the man should
also compensate for the physical suffering involved in the saerificer
having to repeat, the preliminary rites of the ‘*Dīkṣā*,’ the ‘*Upasad*’
and the ‘*Devavrata*.’

In a case where a mechanic approaches the rich man and urges him to
undertake the digging of a tank, or the building of a temple, with the
promise that he would supervise the work and see that it is completed,
but subsequently slips off, then he should” make good all the loss of
money and energy that his employer may have suffered; and thus according
to the law of the ‘trader and the carrier,’ this law has been propounded
by Kātyāyana as being applicable to all cases: in his *Sutra*, be
says—‘If, through the fault of the carrier, the trader suiters some
loss, it shall be borne by the carrier,—and so also the man who, having
urged a man to invest his money on some undertaking, slinks off, after
the work has been only half-done.’ Here ‘*investing*’ means *applying t*
*he* *money to* *the* *work*; and one who makes the man do this, should
make good the loss; such is the sense of the passage.

The law laid down in the verse applies to the person who is engaged on
fooding only, for six months, or one year, to do a specified work. Says
Nārada—‘If a man does not do the stipulated work, he should be forced to
receive his wages and do it; if he receives the wages, but does not do
the work, he should suffer double the amount received in wages; if he
abandons the work before the end of the stipulated time, he deserves to
lose his wages.’—(215)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kṛṣṇala*’—‘Of gold, silver or copper, according to the nature of the
case’ (Medhātithi and Govindarāja); Kullūka also has ‘*suvarṇādi*’,
‘gold and others’, and *not* ‘gold’ only. Buhler has misrepresented him.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā*’ (2.198);—in ‘*Vyavahāramayūkha*’
(p. 92);—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 233), which notes that this
is meant for a case where the hired man has left the work half undone;
if he has done more than half, then only the wages have to be withheld
(and there is to be no fine);—in *Aparārka* (p. 797), which notes that
he should not receive the wages of even that part of the work which he
may have done and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (102a), which explains ‘*anārtaḥ*’
as not suffering from any disability imposed either by royal command or
by supernatural causes.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.215-217)  
**

*Āpastamba* (2.28.2-3).—‘A servant in tillage who abandons his work
shall be flogged. The same punishment shall be inflicted on a herdsman
leaving his work.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.153-154).—‘A hired workman who abandons his work before the
term has expired shall pay the whole amount of the stipulated wages to
his employer; and he shall pay 100 *Paṇas* to the King.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.193-198).—‘If a workman abandons his work after having
received his wages, he shall refund double the amount received by him.
If he abandons it before he has received any wages, he should pay to the
employer the amount of the stipulated wages; but workmen may be allowed
to retain their tools. If the employer has engaged a workman without
settling his wages, he should be made by the King to pay the tenth part
of the profit that he may have made in trade, in cattle or in
agriculture, through the labours of that workman. In a case where the
workman has worked beyond the stipulated time and place,—if this
additional work decreases the profits of the employer, the latter may
give him such wages as he likes for this additional work; but if it has
tended to increase his profits, he shall give more. A man shall be paid
his wages in accordance with the amount of work done: and neither party
shall be stingy (of labour or payment); if the workman is sparing in his
labour, he shall receive only what the employer may give him. In the
case of a carrier, if he destroys the articles he is carrying, through
neglect,—and not through any act of God or of the King—he should be made
to replace it; if the employer puts obstacles in the way of his
starting, he shall pay double the amount of the stipulated wages. If the
carrier abandons the work after he has just started, he should be made
to pay the seventh part of the stipulated wages; the fourth part, if he
abandons it on the way; the whole of it if he abandons it after going
half way of the journey. If the employer dismisses the carrier, he
should be made to pay in the same proportion.’

*Nārada* (5.22).—‘Hired servants are of three kinds: highest, middlemost
and lowest; the wages due for their labour are fixed in proportion to
their skill and to the value of their services.’

Do. (6.2, 3, 5-9).—‘A master shall regularly pay wages to the servant
hired by him, whether it be at the commencement, at the middle, or at
the end of his work, just as he had agreed to do. When the amount of the
wages has not been fixed, the servant of a trader, a herdsman and an
agricultural labourer shall take a tenth part of the profit derived from
the trade, the product of the cows and of the grain respectively. If one
fails to perform such work as he had promised to do, he shall be
compelled to perform it, after first paying him the wages. If he does
not perform it after receiving the wages, he must pay back twice the
amount of the wages received. One who abandons merchandise which he had
agreed to convey to its destination, shall give a sixth part of the
wages. An employer who does not pay the wages that he had agreed to give
shall forfeit those wages together with interest. A merchant who does
not take a conveyance or beasts for draught of burden, after having
hired them, shall be made to pay a fourth part of the hire, and the
whole, if he leaves them half-way. And so shall a earner who fails to
transport the goods entrusted to him forfeit his wages. He shall be
compelled to pay twice the amount of his wages if he raises difficulties
at the time of starting. When the merchandise has been damaged by the
carrier’s fault, he shall have to make good every loss,—not including
such losses as may have been caused by fate (accident) or by the King.’

*Bṛhaspati* (16.8-20).—‘The servant for gain or pay is declared to be of
many sorts; another is servant for a share of the grain...—A servant
engaged for a day, a month, half-month, a six-month, two months, or a
year, must do the work which he promised to do and receive the
stipulated wages. A servant for a share of the grain is of two
kinds—serving either a husbandman or an owner of cattle; ho shall
receive a share of the grain produced, or of the milk; a third or fifth
of the produce shall be given to the cultivator of the soil as his
share. Let that cultivator to whom food and clothing are given take a
fifth part of the crops; and let him who serves in consideration of the
profit take a third part of the grain produced. Should a hired servant
fail in the performance of ever so small a part of his employer’s work,
he forfeits his wages, and may be sued in court for his offence. When a
servant does not perform his work after having received his wages,
though he is able to work,... he shall be compelled to pay twice as much
as his wages as a fine to the King, and to refund the wages to the
employer. he who has promised to do work and does not perform it, shall
he compelled to do so by forcible means even; and if, through obstinacy,
such a servant should still not do it as engaged for, he shall be fined
eight *Kṛṣṇalas*, and his wages shall not he given to him. When a
servant commanded by his employer does any improper act for the benefit
of his employer, the latter shall be held responsible for it. When a
master does not pay wages for the labour stipulated, after the work has
been performed, he shall be compelled by the King to pay it, and a
proportionate fine besides. A man hired for attendance on milch cows
shall receive the whole milk every eighth day.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उत्पन्ने वेतने किंचित्कृतकर्मापि दण्डयितव्यः वेतनं च [न] लभेत, येन दर्पात् कर्मणः प्रक्रान्तस्याकृत्स्नकारी ॥ ८.२१४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

215	A hired (servant or workman) who, without being ill, out of pride fails to perform his work according to the agreement, shall be fined eight krishnalas and no wages shall be paid to him.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/216_Artas_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>216 आर्तस् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

आर्तस् तु कुर्यात् स्वस्थः सन्  
यथाभाषितम् आदितः ।  
स दीर्घस्याऽपि कालस्य  
तल् लभेतैव वेतनम्  ॥ ८.२१६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/216_Artas_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But if he is ill and on recovering, completes the work as originally stipulated, he shall receive his wages for it, even after a long time.—(216)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**आर्तो** यो[^५१] भृतो ऽर्धकृतं कर्म यदि हित्वा गच्छेत् स **स्वस्थः सन्** पुनर् आगत्य यथोक्तम् आदौ तत् कुर्यात् । बहुनापि कालेन पीडया मुक्तः प्रत्यागतः कृतकर्मशेषे **लभेतैव वेतनम्** ॥ ८.२१६ ॥


[^५१]:
     J omits: yo
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Forfeiture of the wages has been declared to be the penalty for the man
when not ill; the present verse lays down the law regarding one who is
ill.

If the labourer falls ill and gives up work after it has been
half-done,—hut, on recovering, comes hack and completes the task as
originally stipulated,—in this case, even though he may have taken a
long time to recover from illness and return to work, the man shall,
receive his wages, on having completed the work.—(210).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, 24a):—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (102a), winch adds the explanation that the man who had
stopped the work through some disability—if, on recovery, he comes and
completes the stipulated work, then, if it were done after a lapse of
time, he should receive his wages.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.215-217)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.215].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रतीतार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.२१५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

216	But (if he is really) ill, (and) after recovery performs (his work) according to the original agreement, he shall receive his wages even after (the lapse of) a very long time.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/217_yathoktam_ArtaH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>217 यथोक्तम् आर्तः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यथोक्तम् आर्तः सुस्थो वा  
यस् तत् कर्म न कारयेत् ।  
न तस्य वेतनं देयम्  
अल्पोनस्याऽपि कर्मणः  ॥ ८.२१७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/217_yathoktam_ArtaH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When a man, sick or well, does not get the stipulated work done, he shall not receive hi s wages,—even though the work be only slightly incomplete.—(217)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अथ वा स्वामी न[^५२] वारयति, येन[^५३] च तत् कर्म कारितं स्यत् स्वां भृतिं दत्वा तदा तत्समम् असौ स्वस्थः कारयितव्यः । अथापि स्वामी ब्रूयात् "न मे किंचित् कर्तव्यम् अस्ति" इति । तत्रापि कृतानुरूपेण लभेतैव यथोक्तम् आर्तः[^५४] ॥ ८.२१७ ॥


[^५४]:
     M G J: yathoktamātrām


[^५३]:
     M G: enaṃ; DK: anena


[^५२]:
     M G: svāmino; DK (1: 845): svāmī no
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If the employer does not dismiss the man, when he has fallen ill, after
having paid off his wages for the part of the work done,—then he should,
after recovery, be made to finish the work. But if the employer should
say—‘I have no work for you,’ then he should receive his wages in
accordance with the part of the work that he may have done.—(217)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 797), which explains
‘*Yathoktam*’ as ‘as agreed upon’;—in *Mitākṣarā* (2.198), to the effect
that—‘if the man,—on recovery, if he has been ill, or even while he is
in perfect health’,—does not complete the task of which only a little is
left undone,—either himself or through some one else,—then he should not
be given any wages at all—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (102a), which explains
‘*kārayet*’ as ‘gets it done by another person’, and ‘*alponasyāpi*’ as
‘even though only a very little be wanting in the completion of the
work.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.215-217)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.215].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

आर्तः स्वस्थो वा यथोदितं कर्म न कुर्वन्, न कारयन् वा, अल्पोनस्यापि वेतनं न लभेत ॥ ८.२१६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

217	But if he, whether sick or well, does not (perform or) cause to be performed (by others) his work according to his agreement, the wages for that work shall not be given to him, even (if it be only) slightly incomplete.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/218_eSha_dharmo.md">
<details open><summary><h3>218 एष धर्मो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एष धर्मो ऽखिलेनोक्तो  
वेतनादानकर्मणः ।  
अत ऊर्ध्वं प्रवक्ष्यामि  
धर्मं समयभेदिनाम्  ॥ ८.२१८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/218_eSha_dharmo.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Thus has the entire law bearing upon the action of ‘Non-payment of Wages’ been explained. After this I am going to expound the law relating to Contract-breakers.—(218)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**वेतनादानकर्मण** इति विवादपदस्यास्य[^५५] नामधेयम् एवम् एतत् । तेन न चोद्यम् एतत् । कथं वेतनस्यादानकर्मोक्तं यावता दानकर्माप्य् उक्तम् "न लभेतैव वेतनम्" इति । नाम्नो हि येन केनचिद् अन्वितेन संबन्धिना नामता न विरुद्धा । न हि यावन्तः सूत्रार्थास् ते सर्वे प्रवर्तन्ते । तथा चाग्निहोत्रे यद्य् अप्य् अग्निप्रजापत्योर् होमस् तथाप्य् अग्निहोत्रम् इति नाम प्रवर्तत एव । एतद् उक्तं तत्रैवं स्थूणादर्शे या च समा नीचा स्याद् इति । 


[^५५]:
     M G J: vivādaparasyāsya

**समयः** संवित्[^५६] सङ्केतः- "इदं मया भवताम् अनुमते निश्चितं कर्तव्यम्" इत्य् अभ्युपगमः । तं भिन्दन्ति व्यतिक्रामन्ति ते **समयभेदिनः** । "संविदश् च व्यतिक्रमः" (म्ध् ८.५) इति यद् उद्दिष्टं तद् इदानीम् उच्यते । 



[^५६]:
     M G: samayasiddhiḥ

पूर्वेणार्धेन पूर्वप्रकारेणोपसंहारो ऽपरेण यथोद्दिष्टप्रकरणान्तरसूचनम् ॥ ८.२१८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*vetanādānakarmaṇaḥ*’ ‘*the action of nonpayment of wages*,’
only names the particular *Head of Dispute*; hence there is no room for
any such objection as the following—“How is it that the text speaks of
having dealt with the *action of non-payment of wages*,—when the
*action* of *payment* also has been dealt with?”—Because there is
nothing wrong in the *naming* of a subject in accordance with anything
that may he related to it; and every little detail does not necessarily
enter into its name, for instance, in the *Agni-hotra-rites*, even
though libations are actually offered to both *Agni and Prajāpati*, it
is called ‘*Agnihotra*,’ ‘offering to Agni’; and similarly in the case
of all such names as ‘*Sthūṇā*,’ ‘*Darśa*’ *and so forth*?

‘*Contract*’ is *agreement*, the stipulation or promise, in the form—‘I
shall certainly do such and such a thing, exactly in the manner in which
you wish.’ The ‘*breakers*’ of this are those who go against it.

What is referred to here is what has been mentioned above (under the
Heads of Dispute) as ‘Breach of Contract?’

The first half of the verse sums up the foregoing section and the latter
introduces the next.—(218)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उपसंहारोपन्यासार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.२१७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

218	Thus the law for the non-payment of wages has been completely stated; I will next explain the law concerning men who break an agreement.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/219_yo_grAma-desha-sanghAnAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>219 यो ग्राम-देश-सङ्घानाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यो ग्राम-देश-संघानां  
कृत्वा सत्येन संविदम् ।  
विसंवदेन् नरो लोभात्  
तं राष्ट्राद् विप्रवासयेत्  ॥ ८.२१९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/219_yo_grAma-desha-sanghAnAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a man, after having entered into a compact under oath with a village, a country or a confederation, should break it, through greed,—him the king shall banish from his kingdom.—(219)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

शालासमुदायो **ग्रामः** । तन्निवासिनो मनुष्या गृह्यन्ते । तेषाम् एव संविदः संभवात् । एवं ग्रामसमुदायो **देशः** । **संघ** एकधर्मानुगतानां नानादेशवासिनां नानाजातीयानाम् अपि प्राणिनां समूहः । यथा भिक्षूणां संघो वणिजां संघश् चातुर्विद्यानां संघ इति । ग्रामादीनां यत् कार्यम्, यथा पारग्रामिकैर् ग्रामो नो ऽपहतप्रायः अस्माकीने गोप्रचारे गाश् चारयन्ति उदकं च भित्त्वा नयन्ति । तद् यदि वो मतं तद् अद्य[^५७] एतद् एषां कर्तुं न दद्मे । एवं नः प्रतिबध्नतां[^५८] यदि तैः सह दण्डादण्डिर् भवति राजकुले वा व्यवहारस् तत्र सर्वे वयम् एककार्याः, नो चेद् उपेक्षामाहे" । तत्र ये संविदते, "बाढम्, किम् इति प्राक्तनी ग्रामस्थितिस् तैर् व्यतिक्रम्यते" इति, एवं प्रोत्साह्य विसंवदेद् बलात् तैर् एव सह संगच्छेत स्वेषु वा नाभ्यन्तरः[^५९] स्यात्, स राज्ञा स्वराष्ट्रान् निर्वास्यितव्यो निष्कासयितव्यः । स्वविषये ऽस्य वस्तुं न देयम् । 


[^५९]:
     M G: bāhyābhyantaraḥ


[^५८]:
     M G: prativardhatāṃ; DK (1: 864): pratibandhatāṃ


[^५७]:
     M G: yad yam

एवं वणिङ्मठब्राह्मणादिकार्ये ईदृशे कृतसंइत् तेन नातिक्रमितव्यम् । यत् कार्यं ग्रामाद्युपकारकं शास्त्राचारप्रसिद्धं पुरराष्ट्राविरोधि तत्संविद्व्यतिक्रमे दण्डो ऽयम् ।   

**लोभाद्** इति । स्वेनोपकारगन्धेन परग्रामणीकृतेनास्वातन्त्र्यं **लोभः** । अज्ञानात् तु विसंवादमान्यस्यान्यः[^६०] कल्पः ॥ ८.२१९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Village*’—is a group of households; and the term here stands for the
*inhabitants* of the village; as it is only among *men* that there can
he a compact. Similarly ‘*country*’ is a group of villages.

‘*Confederation*’—a combination formed by persons professing the same
faith or path, even though inhabiting different countries and belonging
to different castes. For instance, there is the ‘confederation of
mendicants,’ the ‘confederation of traders,’ the ‘confederation of
persons learned in the Vedas,’ and so forth.

There are several kinds of business is which inhabitants of villages,
etc., make a combination among themselves. For instance—‘our village is
being encroached upon by the inhabitants of another village,—very
frequently they graze their cattle on our pasture-lands,—they cut our
embankments and carry away water,—if you be all agreed, then we shall
prevent their doing all this,—and when we prevent them, it is possible
that we may come to blows, or may have to appear before the ‘court;—if
we remain combined in all this, then we shall go forward to prevent the
encroachment; otherwise we shall let it be.’ On this compact being
proposed, men may agree to it, saying—‘yes; why should the ancient
privileges of our village be trespassed by them?’ Now, after having thus
entered the compact and encouraged it, if some one were to shirk away
and make common cause with the other party, and become lukewarm towards
his own neighbours,—such a person should be banished by the king from
his kingdom; *i.e*., he should not be allowed to live there any longer.

Similarly, in regard to the business of tradespeople or Brāhmaṇas and
others, when once a man has entered into a compact, he should not break
it.

The penalty here laid down pertains to the breach of compacts relating
to such work as is of public utility, in due accordance with law and
custom, and not detrimental to the interests of the city and kingdom at
large.

‘*Through* *greed*—‘*greed*’ here stands for succumbing to one’s own
selfish interests as served by the inhabitants of the rival village.

For cases of such breach, *through ignorance*, there is another
remedy.—(219)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 253), which
explains ‘*satyena*’ as ‘by swearing’;—in ‘*Mitākṣarā* (2.187), which
adds that this applies to cases where the cause of action is slight;—in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 182), which adds the following notes:—‘*Grāma*’,
is well-known;—‘*deśa*’ consists of a group of villages, a
district;—‘*saṅgha*’ is a corporation composed of several persons
following one ‘dharma,’ living in different places. It is also quoted in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (107a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 132a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.219-221)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (5.168).—‘He who violates the established rule shall be
banished.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.186-192).—‘If one misappropriates the property of a
corporate body, or breaks the conditions of agreement, the King shall
confiscate his entire property and banish him from the kingdom. What is
declared by the members of the corporation should be obeyed by all
component members; if any of them act contrariwise, he should be fined
the first amercement....... This same rule applies to guilds, trading
companies, corporations of heretics and other corporate bodies.’

*Nārada* (10.2-7).—‘Among heretics, followers of the Veda, guilds,
corporations, troops, assemblages and other associations, the King shall
maintain their usages and customs—whatever be their laws, their duties,
their rules regarding attendance, and the particular inodes of
livelihood prescribed for them, that the

King shall approve of. The King shall prevent them from undertaking such
acts as would be detrimental to the interests, either of their own
associations or of the King himself, or despicable in their very nature.
Mixed assemblages, unlawful wearing of arms and mutual attacks among
these persons shall not be tolerated by the King. Those who cause
dissension among the members of an association, shall undergo punishment
of a specially severe kind.’

*Bṛhaspati* (17.5, 10-16).—‘A compact formed among villages, companies
of artisans, and associations is called an *agreement*; such an
agreement must be observed both in times of distress and for acts of
piety. Two, three or five persons shall be appointed as advisers to the
association; their advice shall be taken by the villagers, companies,
corporations and other fellowships. When a stipulation has been entered
in a document in the form, “The construction of a house or a shed,
temple...... shall be undertaken by us in proportionate shares,”—that is
lawful agreement. Such an agreement must be kept by all. he who fails in
his agreement, though able to perform it, shall be punished with
confiscation of his entire property and by banishment from the town. For
one who has fallen out with his associates, or neglects his duties by
them, a fine is ordained, amounting to six *Niṣkas* of four *Suvarṇas*
each. He who injures the joint stock, or insults a Brāhmaṇa learned in
the three Vedas, or breaks the mutual agreement, shall be banished from
the town. An acrimonious or malicious person, and one who causes
dissension or does violent acts, or who is inimically disposed towards
the company, association or the King, shall be banished instantly from
the town. Whatever is obtained by one man shall belong to all in common;
whether it has been acquired a six-month or a month ago, it shall be
divided in due proportion.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, pp. 793-795).—‘One who is addicted to acts of
violence, one who sows dissension among the members of the corporation,
and one who ruins the property of the corporation,—all these should be
extirpated, after being proclaimed as such;—so says Bhṛgu. Whatever has
been acquired for the corporation, belongs to all the members in equal
shares.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 180).—‘Whatever laws may have been
prescribed for associations, the members thereof shall do all acts
according to them, remaining firm in their duties.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

धर्मार्थयुक्तेषु प्रयोजनेषु राजकार्याविरोधिषु गोप्रचारोदकरक्षणदेवतायतनप्रतिसंस्करणादिषु ग्रामादीनां या संविद् उत्पद्यते, तत्र व्यभिचारिणं तस्माद् देशाद् राजा निर्वासयेत् ॥ ८.२१८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

219	If a man belonging to a corporation inhabiting a village or a district, after swearing to an agreement, breaks it through avarice, (the king) shall banish him from his realm,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/220_nigRhya_dApayech.md">
<details open><summary><h3>220 निगृह्य दापयेच् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

निगृह्य दापयेच् चैनं  
समयव्यभिचारिणम् ।  
चतुःसुवर्णान् षण्निष्कांश्  
छतमानं च राजकम्  ॥ ८.२२० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/220_nigRhya_dApayech.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having caught such a breaker of compact, he shall make him pay six ‘niṣkas’ of four ‘suvarṇas’ each, and also one silver ‘śatamāna.’—(220)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**निगृह्य** अवष्टभ्य पीडयित्वा काललाभम् अकारयित्वा दण्ड्यः । चत्वारि सुवर्णानि येषां निष्काणां परिमाणं ते **चतुःसुवर्णा निष्काः** । यद्य् अपि "चतुःसुवर्णिको निष्कः" (म्ध् ८.१३७) इत्य् अत्रोक्तम्, तथापि शास्त्रान्तरात् "साष्टं[^६१] शतं सुवर्णानां निष्कम् आहुर् महाधियः" इत्य् एवमादिपरिमाणान्तरं पश्यन्[^६२] विशिनष्टि । संज्ञाकारणसामर्थ्याद् एव लभ्यत इति चेत्, पद्यग्रन्थत्वान् न दोषः । 


[^६२]:
     M G: paśyet


[^६१]:
     M G: śābdaṃ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु महार्थे बहुव्रीहिं कृत्वा त्रीन् दण्डान् आहुः । चतुर्भिः सुवर्णैः सह षण्णिष्कान् दण्डनीयः । दश निष्काः प्रतिपादिता भवन्ति । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;बहुव्रीहिसिद्ध्यर्थं सहार्थे कथंचिन् मत्वर्थो योजितव्यः । न हि चित्राभिर् गोभिः सहितश् चित्रगुर् देवदत्त इति भवति । एते च त्रयो दण्डा यदि च त्रिभिर् एक इति कार्यापेक्षया योजनम् । 

निर्वासनदण्डेन[^६३] विकल्पते दण्डो ऽयम् ॥ ८.२२० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Having caught him*,’ *i.e*., detected and put him under restraint—tho
king should punish him, without giving him any time.

*The* ‘*niṣka of four suvarṇas each*’—is that which is made up of four
‘*suvarṇas*.’

Though under 8.317, the ‘*niṣka*’ has been defined as a measure
consisting of four ‘suvarṇas,’ yet the qualification is added here in
view of other definitions of the ‘*niṣka*’ found in other Smṛtis—*e.g*.,
one of them describes it as consisting of ‘a hundred *suvarṇas*.’

It might be argued that, in as much as the author himself has applied
the name ‘*niṣka*’ to four ‘*suvarṇas*’ only, the mere mention of the
name in the present text would be enough to show what is meant.

But, since the work is a metrical treatise, the presence of a
superfluous epithet cannot be regarded as a defect.

Others have taken the term ‘*catuḥsuvarṇa*’ as a Bahuvrīhi compound,
having the collective force, and hence explained the verse as
prescribing *three fines*; the meaning being that the fine is to consist
of ‘*four suvarṇas*,’ and ‘*six niṣkas*’; so that *ten niṣkas* come to
be indicated.

But for the purpose of making the compound a *Bahuvrīhi*, it would be
necessary to fasten the sense of *possession* on to that of
*association*. For mere *association* with ‘variegated cows’ does not
make Devadatta a ‘*Citraguḥ*’ (which is a Bahuvrīhi compound meaning
*possessing variegated cows*).

If the fines are to be taken as *three* distinct ones, then the only
construction possible is to take the three as constituting a single
penalty.

The penalty hero prescribed is alternative to ‘banishment’ (prescribed
in the preceding verse).—(220)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“According to ‘others’ mentioned by Medhātithi, ‘four *Suvarṇas*, *or
six Niṣkas*, *or one Śatamāna*; Kullūka and Rāghavānanda also think it
possible that three separate fines may be inflicted according to the
circumstances of the case.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 182), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Nigṛhya*,’ having him hauled up;—‘*catuḥsuvarṇān*’
qualifying ‘*ṣaṭ niṣkān*’ means ‘six of those *Niṣkas* which consists of
4 *Suvarṇas* each the epithet ‘*catuḥsuvarṇān*’ being added for the
exclusion of the other two measures of the ‘*Niṣkas*’ that are found in
the Śāstras—*viz*. (*a*) ‘the *Niṣka* consists of 108 *Suvarṇas*,’ (*b*)
‘the *Niṣka* consists of 5 *Suvarṇas*.’—‘*Śatamāna*’ consists of 320
*Raktikās*.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.187), which notes that herein Manu
mentions *four* penalties—(1) Banishment (verse 219), (2) fine of four
*Suvarṇas*, (3) fine of 6 *Niṣkas* and (4) fine of one *Śatamāna*; and
any *one* of these may be inflicted in accordance with the peculiar
circumstances of each case, such as the caste, the capacity and other
things of the persons concerned.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 253), which also
regards the four as distinct penalties, to be determined according to
the caste, learning and other qualifications of the persons
concerned;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (107a), which says that ‘*Śatamāna*’ is
equal to 320 *Rattis*;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 132a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.219-221)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.219].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**चतुः सुवर्णादि** च दण्डं च दाप्यः, ततो निर्वास्यः । "निगृह्य दापयेद् वैनम्" इत्य् अपरो दण्डविकल्पपाठः । एवं च सति निर्वासनं दण्डो वा ॥ ८.२१९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

220	And having imprisoned such a breaker of an agreement, he shall compel him to pay six nishkas, (each of) four suvarnas, and one satamana of silver.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/221_etad_daNDavidhim.md">
<details open><summary><h3>221 एतद् दण्डविधिम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एतद् दण्डविधिं कुर्याद्  
धार्मिकः पृथिवीपतिः ।  
ग्राम-जाति-समूहेषु  
समयव्यभिचारिणाम्  ॥ ८.२२१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/221_etad_daNDavidhim.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

This is the law of punishment which the king shall follow in the case of the breakers of compacts relating to villages and caste-federations.—(221)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**जातिसमूहेषु** च नानाजातीयानां समानजातीयानां वा संघेषु तद्विषयो व्यभिचारो येषां इत्य् अर्थः । प्रकरणोपसंहारः ॥ ८.२२१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Caste-federations*’—federations of various castes, or of men belonging
to the same caste;—those who break compacts relating to these
federations.

This verse sums up the section:—(221)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 253);—in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 182), which explains ‘*Jātisamūha*’ as ‘community
of several castes’:—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (107a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 132a), which adds that the penalty to be imposed in each
case is to be determined by considerations of caste, learning and other
qualifications of the culprit.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.219-221)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.219].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उपसंहारार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.२२० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

221	A righteous king shall apply this law of fines in villages and castes (gati) to those who break an agreement.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/222_krItvA_vikrIya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>222 क्रीत्वा विक्रीय ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

क्रीत्वा विक्रीय वा किं चिद्  
यस्येहानुशयो भवेत् ।  
सो ऽन्तर् दशाहात् तद् द्रव्यं  
दद्याच् चैवाददीत वा  ॥ ८.२२२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/222_krItvA_vikrIya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If, after having bought or sold anything, one should repent of it, he may return or take back that thing within ten days.—(222)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद् द्रव्यं प्रचुरक्रयविक्रयं व्यवहारकाले च[^६४] गच्छति न नश्यति मूलतश् च नापचीयते त्रपुताम्रभाण्डादि स्थिरार्घं तादृशस्यानुपभुक्तस्य दशाहमध्ये आदानप्रत्यर्पणे[^६५] । यत् तु विरलक्रेतृकं[^६६] कैश्चिद्[^६७] देवयात्रोत्सवादौ विक्रीयते अनियतार्थं च तस्य तद् अहर् अपरेद्युर् वा । फलकुसुमादौ तु तत्क्षण एवानुशयः । पश्चाद् अपि[^६८] क्रीत्वा यस्यानुशयः "न ममैतद् उपयुज्यते" स दशाहमध्ये दद्यात् । विक्रेता प्रतीपं गृह्णीयात्[^६९] । विक्रेतुर् अनुशये[^७०] "न मया साधु कृतं यद् विक्रीतम्" इति, तदा क्रेता तस्मै प्रतिपादयितव्यः । एकस्थानवासिनां चैष कालः । देशान्तरवासिनां तात्कालिकी प्रतिनिवृत्तिः । 


[^७०]:
     M G DK add: ādadīta


[^६९]:
     J: pratigṛhṇīyāt


[^६८]:
     M G: paścāttrapaḥ; DK (1: 880): paścāttāpaḥ


[^६७]:
     M G: kaścid; J omits: kaiścid


[^६६]:
     M G: viralakrema(?)tṛkaṃ; J: viralakrayavikrayaṃ


[^६५]:
     M G omit: ādānapratyarpaṇe


[^६४]:
     J: na

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;केचिद् गोभूम्यादिविषयं विधिम् इमम् इच्छन्ति, न वस्त्रादौ ।

- स्मृत्यन्तरे हि वाणिक्पण्ये ऽन्यो विधिर् आम्नायते । एवं नारदः पठति ।

- क्रीत्वा मूल्येन यः पण्यं दुष्क्रीतम् इति मन्यते ।

- विक्रेतुः प्रतिदेयं तत् तस्मिन्न् एवाह्न्य् अविक्षतम् ॥

- द्वितीये ऽहनि ददत् क्रेता मूल्यात् त्र्यंशांसम् आवहेत् ।

- द्विगुणं तत् तृतीये ऽह्नि परतः क्रेतुर् एव तत् ॥ इति[^७१] । (न्स्म् ९.२–३)


[^७१]:
     M G DK place iti after the first verse.

विक्रयार्थं यद् द्रव्यं तत् पण्यं यद् विक्रीय तद् उत्पन्नेन द्रव्यान्तरक्रयादिना पुरुषो व्यवहरति जीविकाधनम् अर्जयितुं तथा पणभूमौ प्रसारितम् अप्रसारितं च भवति वणिजाम्, तत्रेह पण्यग्रहणात् कश्चिद् विशेषो विवक्षितः । इतरथा "क्रीत्वा मूल्येन" इत्य् एतावद् अपेक्ष्यम् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कः पुनर् असौ विशेषः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;उच्यते । यत् क्रीतम् अपि पण्यत्वम् अजहद् वणिग्भिर् विक्रियते[^७२] तर्हि विक्रयार्थम् एव क्रीणन्ति । तेषां वणिजाम् इतरेतरं[^७३] क्रीणतां विक्रीणानां च नारदीयो विधिः, अन्येषां मानव इति <u>केचित्</u> । 


[^७३]:
     M G DK: itaretara-


[^७२]:
     M G: kriyate

किं पुनर् अत्र युक्तम् । पण्यधर्मादेर् व्यवस्था वानुसरणीया । तथा चाश्वानां बलसंचारो हस्तिनाम् अङ्कुशारोहणं विक्रयविभावकम् इत्यादिना व्यवहारस् तेषु पण्येषु सिद्धो भवति । अविक्षितम् अविनष्टम् उपनिध्यादौ वस्त्रादेर् यावन् नात्र नाशस् तावतो मूल्यम् उपनिधात्रे दीयते, द्रव्यं तु गृह्णाति । इह त्व् ईषन्नाशे ऽपि सर्वं मूल्यं देयम् क्रेतुः ॥ ८.२२२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the case of goods whereof buying and soiling are constantly going on,
which do not deteriorate, either in quantity or in quality or in
price—such, for instance, as vessels of copper, tin and other
metals,—whose value remains constant,—if it has not been brought into
use, it can be returned or taken hack within ten days.

When such things as fruits and flowers, which cannot last long, have
been bought at fairs and such gatherings, the ‘repentance’ should be at
the same moment, or on the same day, or the next.

After that, if the purchaser repents—‘this thing I have bought is of no
use to me,’—then he should return it within ten days. Similarly, if the
repentance is on the part of the seller—‘I have not done well in selling
the thing,’—then the buyer should be made to return it to him.

The period here allowed is for the case of persons inhabiting the same
place. In the case of parties belonging to different places, the
returning must be done at the very time of the purchase.

Some people hold that the rule here laid down pertains to such goods as
cattle, land and the like, and not to clothes and such articles.

In another *Smṛti*, a different rule has been laid down in regard to the
buying and selling. Xārada says as follows:—‘Having bought a merchandise
for a certain price, if one thinks that he has not done well in buying
it, he should return it, unharmed, to the seller, on the same day; if he
return it on the second day, the buyer should suffer the third part of
the price paid; on the third day, he loses the double of the third part,
and on the fourth day the thing must remain with the buyer’—(*Nārada* 9.
2-3).

Anything that is laid out for sale is called ‘merchandise,’ by selling
which the seller gets a price, with which he buys something else, and
thus makes a living for himself. Such an article is spread out in the
market by the trader. Now from the use of this particular term in the
text of Nārada, it is clear that something very special is meant; for,
otherwise, the text quoted would mean the same thing as the foregoing
text—‘Having bought a thing at a certain price, etc.’ (*Nārada* 9.1).

Now the question arises—What is this something special that is meant?

Our answer is as follows:—The rule laid down by Nārada is meant to be
applicable to the case where the article, even after being *bought*,
still continues to remain ‘merchandise,’ in the sense that it is laid
out for sale by the tradesman who bought it from a fellow-trader only
for selling it on his own account—*i.e*., in cases of mutual
transactions among tradesmen themselves; while the rule propounded by
Manu is meant to apply to all other cases. Such is the explanation given
by some people.

Now, what is the right view on this point?

In each individual case, one should act according to the nature of the
article concerned, or according to local usage. Thus it is that we And
such practices as the trying of the pace of a horse, the applying of the
goad to the elephant, the discussion of the nature of sales effected and
so on.

In the text of Nārada quoted above, the term ‘*unharmed*’ means *not
spoilt or destroyed*. In the case of ‘deposits’ in the shape of cloths
and such things, the depositor receives the value of only that part of
it which has been spoilt, and the remnant he takes back all right. While
in the case of ‘*sales*’ even the slightest harm makes the buyer liable
to pay the whole price.—(222)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“According to Medhātithi, Govindarāja and Kullūka, the rule refers to
things which are not easily spoilt, such as land, copper etc., not to
flowers, fruit and the like;—according to Nārāyaṇa, to grain and
seeds.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.177), which adds that this refers
to such things as get spoilt by use,—*e.g*., houses beds, seats etc;—and
*not* to seeds, metals, beasts of burden, gems, slave-girls, milking
animals and slaves, for whom Yājñavalkya prescribes a period of 10, 1,
5, 7, 30, 3 and 15 days respectively. It goes on to add that the
provision here made is applicable to only those cases where the
commodity was purchased without proper examination; in cases where it
has been duly tested and examined before purchase, the transaction
cannot be rescinded.—The verse is quoted again on 2.254.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 831);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 190),
which adds the following notes:—‘*Anuśayaḥ*,’ *desire to withdraw*, or,
as some people hold, *repentance*;—‘*dadyāt*’, *should return*,—*i.e*.
the buyer to the seller;—‘*ādodīta*,’ *should take back*, *i.e*., t he
seller from the buyer;—this refers to such things as are likely to be
spoilt by use, such as houses, fields, conveyances and so forth,—as also
seeds; but not metals, beasts of burden and such other tilings.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 515), which adds that what is stated
here refers to things other than those enumerated by *Yājñavalkya*
(2.177);—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 947);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p.
88);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (108b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.222-223)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.177).—‘Grains should be tested within ten days of
purchase; metals within a day; beasts of burden within five days: gems,
within seven days; female slaves, within a month; milch cattle, within
three days; male slaves, within a fortnight, \[and the sale may be
rescinded within these specified periods\].’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 91).—‘Having sold a commodity, if the vendor fails to
hand it over he should be fined 12 *Paṇas*; except when there is some
defect in the commodity itself, or when some sudden calamity befalls
him, or when the price agreed upon is excessively low, by reason of the
vendor being in a distressed state of mind. Merchants may he granted one
night for reconsidering their purchase; cultivators, three nights;
cattle-tenders, five nights; persons of the mixed and higher castes,
seven nights, in the case of the selling of the means of their
livelihood. In the case of commodities liable to damage by lapse of
time, rescission of sale may he permitted only to such an extent as may
not spoil the commodities concerned. After having made a purchase, if
the buyer refuses to accept the article, he should be fined 12 *Paṇas*,
except when there are defects in the commodity itself, or when some
sudden calamity has befallen him, or when the price agreed upon is
excessively high, paid by him on account of the distressed state of his
mind. Rescission by the buyer also should be permitted in the same
manner as in the case of the vendor.’

*Nārada* (8.4-9).—‘If a man sells property for a certain price, and does
not hand it over to the purchaser, he shall have to pay its produce, if
it is immovable, and the profits arising on it, if it is movable
property. If there has been a fall in the market-value of the article in
question in the interval, the purchaser shall receive the article
itself, and together with it the difference (in point of value). This
rule applies to those who are inhabitants of the same place; but to
those who travel abroad, the profits arising from dealing in foreign
countries shall be made over as well. If the article sold should have
been injured, or destroyed by fire, or carried off, the loss shall be
charged to the seller, because he did not deliver it immediately after
the sale. When a man shows one thing which is faultless but delivers
another thing which has a blemish, ho shall be compelled to pay twice
its value to the purchaser, and an equal amount as fine to the King. So
when a man sells something to one person, and afterwards delivers it to
another person, he shall be compelled to pay twice its value to the
purchaser and a fine to the King. When a purchaser does not accept an
article purchased by himself, which is delivered to him by the vendor,
the vendor commits no wrong in selling it to another person.’

*Nārada* (9.2-6, 16).—‘When a purchaser, after having purchased an
article for a certain price, thinks he has made a foolish bargain, he
may return it to the vendor on the same day, in an undamaged condition.
When the purchaser returns it on the second day, he shall lose a
thirtieth part of the price. He shall lose twice as much on the third
day. After that time, the purchaser must keep it. The purchaser shall
examine an article before purchasing it, in order to find out its good
and bad qualities; that which has been approved by him after close
examination, cannot be returned to the vendor. Milch cattle may be
examined for three days; beasts of burden, for five days; and in the
ease of precious stones, pearls and coral, the period of examination may
extend over seven days. Bipeds shall be examined within a fortnight; a
female within twice that time; all sorts of grain, within ten days; iron
and clothes within a single day...... A merchant who is acquainted with
the qualities of the merchandise he deals in must not annul a purchase
after having once made it; he ought to know all about the profit and
loss on merchandise and its origin.’

*Bṛhaspati* (18.3-6).—‘The examiner shall examine the article himself
and show it to others; when, after examining and approving it, he has
accepted it, he is not at liberty to return it. The foolish man who
sells an article, though acquainted with its defects, shall have to pay
twice its value to the purchaser and a fine of the same amount to the
King. What has been sold by one intoxicated or insane, or at a very low
price, or under the impulse of fear, or by one not his own master, or by
an idiot, shall be relinquished by the purchaser; or it may be recovered
from him by forcible means. Within a certain period, if a defect should
be discovered anywhere in the commodity purchased, it shall he returned
to the vendor and the purchaser shall recover the price.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 191).—‘If a man, after having purchased
an article, refuses to take it,—or if after taking it, does not return
it undamaged,—he shall recover the price paid for it, after paying the
tenth part of it to the vendor. This shall he done within ten days of
the transaction; after that there can he no rescission of the sale.’

Do. (Do., p. 197).—‘If a man, after having purchased a milch cattle or
such things,—but before actual delivery—returns it undamaged, within
time, he should pay to the vendor the tenth part of the price. If he
repents it after he has taken delivery, he should pay the sixth part of
the price.’

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 198).—‘Grasses, wood, bricks, threads,
grains, wines, liquids, clothes, baser metals and gold, shall he
examined at the time of the transaction only.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अन्तर्दशाहम् आदानप्रत्यर्पणे साम्नेत्य् अयम् अपाठः । येनोर्ध्वम् अपि दशाहात् कः शक्तस् साम्ना दानादाने प्रतिषेद्धुम् । लब्धिमेष्व् अपि द्रव्येषु सामाशक्यं प्रतिषेद्धुम्, किं पुनः कृत्रिमेषु, यत्र कश्चिद् धर्मगतिर् नास्ति । धर्म्येषु तु प्रतिग्रहेषु तदनन्तरनिर्वृत्तत्वाद् धर्मस्य साम्नाप्य् अश्क्यं कृतम् अकृतं कर्तुम् । तत्र प्रत्यर्पणे पुनर्दानं वा कृतं भवेत् परित्यागो वा । यतश् चैतद् एवम् । अत एवं पठितव्य उत्तरश्लोकार्धः- "सो ऽयं दशाहात् तद्द्रव्यं दद्याच् चैवाददीत च" इति । अत्रैवार्थ उत्तरश्लोकार्धपाठो ऽन्यो भवति- "दानादाने दशाहं तु स्याताम् अपि निपातिनि" इति । अथ वा सामग्रहणं दशाहे दण्डनिवृत्त्यर्थम् । अन्तर्दशाहानुशये कथंचिद् विवदतां राजाधिगमे दण्डनिवृत्तिर् यथा स्याद् राजतस् तयोः । तथा च दशाहस्योत्तरत्र तद्विवादे दण्डः श्रूयते ॥ ८.२२१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

222	If anybody in this (world), after buying or selling anything, repent (of his bargain), he may return or take (back) that chattel within ten days.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/223_pareNa_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>223 परेण तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

परेण तु दशाहस्य  
न दद्यान् नापि दापयेत् ।  
आददानो ददत् चैव  
राज्ञा दण्ड्यौ शतानि षट्  ॥ ८.२२३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/223_pareNa_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But after ten days, he shall neither return nor take it back; he who takes it back, as well as he who returns it, should be fined by the king six hundred.—(223)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

दशाहात् परतो न क्रीतानुशयः । जातानुशयश् चापि क्रेता विक्रेता वा यदि[^७४] राजनि विवदतां तौ ततः **षट् शतानि दण्ड्यौ** । **न दद्याद्** इति नायम् अदृष्टार्थः प्रतिषेधः । किं तर्हि ज्ञायते । स्थितिर् ईदृशी । अनिच्छन् क्रेता दशाहाद् ऊर्ध्वं न त्याजनीयो नापि विक्रेता ग्राह्यितव्यः । अतश् च यदि साम्नोभयेच्छायां दानादाने स्यातां तत्र न कश्चिद् दोषः ॥ ८.२२३ ॥


[^७४]:
     M G: parato na kretā yāvatānuśayaś cāpi vikretā yadi; DK: parato na | kretā jātānuśayaś cāpi vikretā yadi
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

After ten days there can be no ‘rescission of the sale.’

If the buyer does repent of the transaction and applies to the king for
its rescission, be should be fined six hundred ‘he shall *not return
it*.’—This prohibition is not put forth with a view to any
transcendental result; all that is meant is that such is the established
rule,—that after ten days the buyer should not be forced, against his
wish, to give up the article, nor should the seller he forced to take it
back. So that there is nothing wrong if the returning and taking back
are done amicably by mutual understanding.—(223)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.258);—in *Aparārka* (p. 831);—and
in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 199), which adds that the fine meant is 100
*paṇas*;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 88);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (108b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.222-223)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.222].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

नायं श्लोको दशाहाद् ऊर्ध्वं सामप्रतिषेधार्थ आरभ्यते, साम्नाप्य् ऊर्ध्वं दशाहान् **न दद्यान् नापि दापयेद्** इति । न हि साम प्रतिषेद्धुं शक्यम् इत्य् उक्तम् । यत्र तु साम्नापि प्रत्यर्पणं नास्ति, तत्र नियमयत्य् एव, यथा "सकृद् अंशो निपतति" इति; अत्रापि त्व् अंशपातने साम्नाइव प्रतिषेद्धुं शक्यं नियमाभावाद्, व्यवस्थार्थत्वाच् च । कन्यादाने तु निष्क्रमविसर्गाभ्याम् इति विशेषनियमात् साम न विद्यते ॥ ८.२२२ ॥

_अनुशयप्रसङ्गाद् इदम् अन्यद् अत्रोच्यते ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

223	But after (the lapse of) ten days he may neither give nor cause it to be given (back); both he who takes it (back) and he who gives it (back, except by consent) shall be fined by the king six hundred (panas).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/224_yas_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>224 यस् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यस् तु दोषवतीं कन्याम्  
अनाख्याय प्रयच्छति ।  
तस्य कुर्यान् नृपो दण्डं  
स्वयं षण्णवतिं पणान्  ॥ ८.२२४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/224_yas_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a man gives a defective damsel, without mentioning the defects, he should be punished by the king himself with a fine of ninety-six ‘paṇas.’—(221)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

या कन्या दोषैर् युक्ता सा च दात्रा वराय नाख्यायते न प्रकाश्यत एवम् एव दीयते, तत्र दातुर् दण्डो विदिते राज्ञा कार्यः । **स्वयं**ग्रहणम् आदरर्थम् । कन्यादोषाश् च धर्मप्रजासामर्थ्यविघातहेतवः, क्षयो व्याधिर् मैथुनसंबन्धश् च । "नोन्मत्ताया" (म्ध् ८.२०५) इत्य् एतत्प्रकरणोक्तो दण्डो ऽयं वा ॥ ८.२२४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When a maiden happens to be defective, but she is not described as being
so, to the bridegroom, and is given to him without disclosing her
defects,—then, on these becoming known, the king shall punish the giver.

The term ‘*himself*’ is meant to indicate the gravity of the offence.

Such circumstances in connection with the girl as may be detrimental to
morality, to progeny, and to capacity in general are to be regarded as
her ‘*defects*’; *e.g*., such diseases as consumption and the like, loss
of virginity and so forth.

The punishment in this case is to be cither what is laid down in the
present text, or that prescribed above, under 205.—(221)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in ‘*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī*’ (p. 1019).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (1.66).—‘If a man gives a girl in marriage without
proclaiming her blemish, he should he lined the highest amercement.’

*Nārada* (Aparārka, p 95).—(Same as Manu, but reading
‘*Purvasāhasachoditam*’ for ‘*ṣaṇṇavatim paṇān*’).

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 92).—‘In the case of marriages, for the three higher
castes, there can he rescission before the Hand-joining ceremony; for
the Śūdra, before intercourse has taken place. Even after the
Hand-joining ceremony has been performed, the marriage can be revoked if
the girl is discovered to have serious defects; hut marriage can never
he revoked after the birth of children. If the father gives away the
girl without proclaiming any serious defects that she may have, he
should be lined 96 *Paṇas*, and he should he made to return the fee or
the dowry that he may have received for the girl.’

*Nārada* (12.33).—‘When a man gives a maiden in marriage who has a
secret blemish, without making the blemish known, the King shall visit
him with the gravest punishment.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

धर्मप्रजानिरोधिना रोगेण गृहीता स्पृष्टमैथुना वा दोषवती । ताम् **अनाख्याय दोषवतीं** प्रयच्छतो दण्डः, "नोन्मत्ताया" इति पूर्वोक्तश्लोकेनैव गतार्थो, यतः वयम् अत्र नाधीयामहे । अथ वानुवादपक्षः केनचित् कारणेन तस्यास्य च शक्यते दर्शयितुम्, यतो युक्तम् अध्ययनम् [इहापि ॥ ८.२२३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

224	But the king himself shall impose a fine of ninety-six panas on him who gives a blemished damsel (to a suitor) without informing (him of the blemish).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/225_akanyeti_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>225 अकन्येति तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अकन्येति तु यः कन्यां  
ब्रूयाद् द्वेषेण मानवः ।  
स शतं प्राप्नुयाद् दण्डं  
तस्या दोषम् अदर्शयन्  ॥ ८.२२५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/225_akanyeti_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a man, through malice, speaks of a maiden as ‘not a virgin’ he should receive the punishment of one hundred, if unable to prove her impurity.—(225)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अकन्या** वृत्तमैथुनसंबन्धेति **यो** वदेत् तं च दोषं न भावयेत्, तदा **शतं** कार्षापणं दण्ड्यः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये मन्यन्ते ऽल्पत्वाद् दण्डस्य महत्वाच् चाक्रोशस्येति करणस्य च पदार्थविपर्यये ऽसकृत्त्वेन दर्शनाद् **अकन्येति** शब्दस्वरूपं विवक्षितम् । "अकन्येयम्" इत्य् एतेनैव शब्देनाक्रोशेत् तस्य शतं दण्डः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कः पुनर् अत्र विसेषः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;उच्यते । स इदंवादी पृच्छ्यते- "कथम् इयम् अकन्या" इति । स चेद् ब्रूयात् "निर्लज्जा नृशंसाश्लीलवादिनी, नैष कन्यानां धर्मः" । एतच् च न साधयेत् । तदायं दण्डः कन्यागुणनिषेध उक्ते सति । 

<u>अथ वा</u> कन्याशब्दं प्रथमवयोवचनम् आश्रित्य परोक्षे प्रार्थयमानस्य ब्रूयात्- "किं तावन् नासौ कन्या अतिस्वल्पा वृद्धा वा," तत्र कन्या दत्ता यदि राजानं ज्ञापयेद् अभिरूपतमा कन्या मदीया प्रार्थ्यमानानेन तस्याम् अभिलाषः, एवम् उक्त्वाथ[^७५] पराजितः, तत्र प्राप्तकालायां यद्य् एवम् उक्तं तदा पराजितस्यायं दण्डः ॥ ८.२२५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Not a virgin*’ —*i.e*., one who has already had sexual intercourse. If
a man speaks of a maiden as such, but is unable to prove her guilt, he
should he fined one hundred coins.

Others have held the view that, in view of the fact that the penalty
prescribed is too small in comparison with the serious nature of the
defamation, the text should he taken as referring to the actual
utterance of the exact words ‘not a virgin;’ specially as we cannot get
over the significance of the particle ‘*iti*,’ (‘*as*’);—the sense thus
being that the man is to be fined one hundred, only when ho actually
defames the maiden as a ‘non-maiden.’

“What difference does this make?”

The explanation is as follows:—When the man defames the maiden as a
‘non-virgin,’ if he is asked—‘How is she a non-virgin?’—and he
replies—‘she is immodest, cruel, and prone to using obscene
language,—all which is not proper for virgins,’—hut cannot prove it,
then it is that he is to be fined only one hundred,—*i.e*., when all
that he alleges is the absence in the girl of such qualities as should
he present in all maidens (and does not accuse her of having actually
lost her virginity).

Or, the term ‘virgin’ may he taken as denoting *juniority of age*; and
the meaning of the text explained as follows:—When a man is seeking a
certain girl in marriage, if some one should come and tell him behind
the back of the girl’s relations—‘that girl is not a maiden, she is too
young—or too old,’—then the guardian of the girl complains to the
king—‘my girl is extremely handsome and this man is maligning her to the
prospective bridegroom, because he is himself desirous of having her’;
thereupon if the defamer is proved guilty,—as he is, when he is found to
have made the allegations when the girl was actually of the right
age,—then he is fined ‘one hundred.’—(225)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavaklya* (1.66).—‘If the bridegroom relinquishes the bride when she
has no defects, he should he punished; and if he falsely accuses her of
defects, he should he lined a hundred.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.47; Aparārka, p. 96).—‘If one speaks of a blemishless girl as
having a blemish, he should be fined the highest amercement..’

*Nārada* (12.3).—‘The selection of the bride loses its binding force
when a blemish is subsequently discovered in her.’

Do. (12.31).—‘Let no man calumniate a faultless maiden; neither must one
calumniate a faultless suitor. When however, there is an actual defect,
it is no offence if they dissolve their mutual agreement.’

Do. (12.34-36).—‘When a man, from hatred, declares a maiden to have lost
her virginity, he shall pay 100 *Paṇas* as tine, unless he is able to
give proofs of her disgrace. When a man, after having plighted his faith
to a maiden, abandons her although she is faultless, he shall be fined
and made to marry the maiden, even against his will. Affliction with a
chronic or hateful disease, deformity, loss of virginity,—these are
declared to be the defects of a maiden.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

स्वशब्दव्याख्यातः श्लोकः । कस्य पुनर् हेतोर् अयं दण्डो महान् विधीयते, येन — ॥ ८.२२४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

225	But that man who, out of malice, says of a maiden, 'She is not a maiden,' shall be fined one hundred (panas), if he cannot prove her blemish.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/226_pANigrahaNikA_mantrAH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>226 पाणिग्रहणिका मन्त्राः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पाणिग्रहणिका मन्त्राः  
कन्यास्व् एव प्रतिष्ठिताः ।  
नाऽकन्यासु क्व चिन् नॄणां  
लुप्त-धर्मक्रिया हि ताः  ॥ ८.२२६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/226_pANigrahaNikA_mantrAH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The marriage-ritual texts are applicable to virgins only, and nowhere among men, to non-virgins; and this because these latter are excluded from religious acts.—(220)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**पाणिग्रहणं** विवाहो दारकर्म । मन्त्राणां[^७६] तत्र विद्यमानत्वात्, स च "अग्निम् अयक्षत" (आश्ग् १.७.१३) इत्य् एताभ्यां संबन्धेनासां विवाहे कर्तृत्वं दर्शयति । परमार्थतस् तु विवाहविधौ "कन्याम् उपगच्छेत्" इति विहितम्, तादृशम् एवार्थं मन्त्रा अभिवदन्ति । न पुनर् मन्त्रेषु कन्याशब्दश्रवणात् कन्यानां विवाहः,[^७७] मन्त्राणाम् अविधायकत्वात् । एष एवार्थस् तद्विपरीतप्रतिषेधमुखेन दृढीक्रियते । **नाकन्यासु**[^७८]** क्वचिन् नॄणाम्** । न कस्यांचिद् वेदशाखायां मनुष्याणाम् अकन्याविषयो विवाहः श्रुतः । **लुप्तक्रियाः** यासां धर्मे ऽग्निहोत्रादाव् अपत्योत्पादनविधौ चाधिकारो नास्त्य् अतस् ता न विवाह्याः । अतः "कन्याम् अकन्या" (म्ध् ८.२२५) इति वदन् महता दण्डेन योजनीय इति पूर्वश्लोकाद् अनन्तरम् उच्यते । अप्राप्तमौथुना स्त्री **कन्यो**च्यते ॥ ८.२२६ ॥


[^७८]:
     M G: kanyāsu; J: na kanyāsu


[^७७]:
     M G: vivāha-


[^७६]:
     M G omit: mantrāṇāṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Pāṇigrahaṇa*’ is *marriage*, *the taking of a wife*; in connection
with the ritual of marriage, there are certain *mantra* - *texts*—such
as ‘*kanyā agnimayakṣata*, etc.’ (‘the virgin offered a sacrifice to
Agni’)—which indicate that it is *virgins* alone that can undergo the
ceremonies of marriage. In fact, the very *injunction* of marriage
itself says—‘one should marry a virgin,’ and it is this that is
reiterated in the *mantra-texts*; and the mere fact of the term
‘virgin,’ being found in these *mantra-texts* could not be regarded as
indicative of the restriction of marriage to *virgins* only; and this
for the simple reason that mantra-texts, by their very nature have no
injunctive force.

The same idea is further emphasised by means of a negative
assertion—‘*and nowhere among men, to non-virgins*.’—That is, in no
Vedic text is marriage with a *non-virgin* found to be mentioned.

‘*Excluded from religions acts*’— In as much as such girls would not be
entitled to help in the performance of the *Agni-hotra* and other rites,
or in the proper begetting of children, they are not fit for being
married.

For this reason, when a man calls a *virgin* a ‘*non-virgin*,’ he should
be punished with a heavy fine. This is what is meant by the adding of
the present verse after what has been said in the preceding one.—(226)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 741), to the
effect that the *mantric* marriage rites are meant only for those girls
who are entitled to the name ‘*Kanyā*’ (virgin), *i*. *e*., those whose
generative organs have not been ‘penetrated’;—and in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 1019).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.226-227)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 741).—‘On the completion of the
ceremony of Joining Hands, the maiden is married only *in mantras*; even
after that, until she has had intercourse, she may be married again.’

*Smṛti* (Do., p. 585).—‘The maiden becomes separated from her *gotra* on
marriage, on the completion of the *Seventh Step*.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

तथा वैवाहिको मन्त्रः "अर्यमणं देवं कन्याग्निमयक्षत । स नो अर्यमा देवः प्रेतो मुञ्चतु मा पतेः स्वाहा" इत्यादिना **कन्यास्व्** इत्य् अत्र [मन्त्रार्थः, तास्व् एव प्रतिष्ठि]ता विवाहादिभिर् इत्य् अर्थः । एवं च सति पूर्वं पाणिग्रहणात् प्रतिगृहीतापि स्पृष्टमैथुना परित्यक्तव्येति ॥ ८.२२५ ॥

_यश् च ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

226	The nuptial texts are applied solely to virgins, (and) nowhere among men to females who have lost their virginity, for such (females) are excluded from religious ceremonies.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/227_pANigrahaNikA_mantrA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>227 पाणिग्रहणिका मन्त्रा ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पाणिग्रहणिका मन्त्रा  
नियतं दारलक्षणम् ।  
तेषां निष्ठा तु विज्ञेया  
विद्वद्भिः सप्तमे पदे  ॥ ८.२२७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/227_pANigrahaNikA_mantrA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The marriage -texts are clearly conducive to ‘wife-hood’; and these are to be recognised by the learned as completed at the ‘seventh-step.’—(227)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**दारा** भार्या, तस्या **लक्षणं** निमित्तं विवाहमन्त्राः, तैस् तत्र प्रयुक्तैर् विवाहाख्यः संस्कारो निर्वर्तते । द्विजातीनां पुनर् मन्त्राः । तत्र शूद्रस्य दारप्रसङ्गः, न हि तस्य मन्त्राः सन्ति, मन्त्रवर्जं सर्वान्येतिकर्तव्यतास्ति । अतो विवाहाख्यसंस्कारोपलक्षणं मन्त्राः । **तेषां** मन्त्राणां **निष्ठा** समाप्तिः **सप्तमे पदे विज्ञेया** । लाजाहोमम् अभिनिर्वर्त्य त्रिःप्रदक्षिणम् अग्निम् आवर्त्य सप्तपदानि स्त्री प्रक्रम्यते "एष एकपदी भव" इत्यादि यावत् "सखा सप्तपदी भव" इति । तस्मिन् प्रक्रान्ते कन्यायाः पदे कन्यापितुर् वोढुर् वानुशयो नास्ति । उन्मादवत्य् अपि भार्यैव । न त्याज्या । 

- मैथुनवत्यास् तु नैवासौ विवाहः । सत्य् अपि लाजाहोमादाव् इतिकर्तव्यतास्वरूपे न भार्या सा । अतस् तत्र द्रव्यान्तरवद् अनुशयः । यथा च शूद्रकर्तृकेणाधानेन नाहवनीयो[^७९] भवति, सपिण्डायाश् च कृते ऽप्य् अग्निसंस्करे न[^८०] विवाहस्वरूपत्वम् । तत्र तु प्रसिद्धम्- "संस्कारकरणाद् एकः प्रायश्चित्तीयते पुमान्" । कन्या चान्यस्याप्य् अविवाह्या, वसिष्ठवचनात् । 


[^८०]:
     M G omit: na


[^७९]:
     M G: śūdrakartṛkeṇādhānenāhavanīyo; J: śūdrakartṛkeṇādhānenāhavanīyo na

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;यदि प्रजनविघातरोगगृहीताम् ऊढ्वा न त्यजति का तर्हि गतिः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;सत्यधिकारे[^८१] अन्याम् उद्वाहयिष्यति, "सद्यस् त्व् अप्रियवादिनी" (म्ध् ९.८१) इतिवत् । कृते तु जातपुत्रायाम् आधाने यदि क्षयो व्याधिः स्यात् तथापि नैनाम् अधिविन्देद् अधिवेदनिमित्तानां परिगणनात् (म्ध् ९.७७–८५) । तत्रापि यदि "कामतस् तु प्रवृत्तानाम्" (म्ध् ३.१२) इत्य् एतत् प्रयोजकम् इष्यते न निवारयामः । 


[^८१]:
     M G: pratyadhikāre

तेनैव संक्षेपतः कन्यायां धर्मः । यथान्येषां द्रव्याणां दशाहाद् ऊर्ध्वम् अपि साम्ना प्रत्यर्पणम्, नैवं कन्यानां कृतविवाहानाम् । शुल्कदेयानां अपि प्राग् विवाहाद् द्रव्यान्तरधर्मः । या तु धर्माय दीयते तस्या नैवानुशय इति वचनात् । तत्रापि "दत्ताम् अपि हरेत् कन्यां ज्यायांश् चेद् वर आव्रजेत्" (य्ध् १.६५) इत्य् अस्त्य् एवापहार आ सप्तमपदात् । सप्तमे तु पदे[^८२] दानानिवृत्तेर् गवादिद्रव्यदानवन् नास्त्य् अपहारः । अथैव केनचित् कस्मैचिद् गवि दत्तायां न तयोर् अन्योन्येच्छयानुशयो दानादाने, दानस्य तदानीम् एव निवृत्तत्वात् । प्रतिगृहीतं चेद् दात्रे पुनः प्रयच्छेत् तद्दानोत्तरम् एव तत् स्यात्, न[^८३] पूर्वदाननिवृत्तिः । एवं सगुणयोः कन्यावरयोर् नान्योन्येच्छया त्यागो ऽस्ति, प्राग् अपि विवाहात् । विवाहे कृते दोषवत्या अपि नास्ति त्यागः कन्यायाः । स्पृष्टमैथुना या कन्यैव न भवति, अतो ऽसौ त्यज्यते, कन्याया यतो विवाहो विहितो विवाहः । विवाहश् चोपयोगस्थानीयः[^८४] । यथा परिभुक्तं वस्त्रम् अन्तर्दशाहम् अपि नैव विक्रेत्रे ऽर्प्यते, तथैव कन्या कृतविवाहा । पुनश् चायम् अर्थो निर्णेष्यते "सकृत् कन्या प्रदीयते" (म्ध् ९.४७) इत्य् अत्रान्तरे ॥ ८.२२७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Wife*’ is *consort*; and ‘wife-hood’ is brought about by the
*mantras*,— which are thus ‘*conducive to*’ it. That is, the sacramental
rite called ‘marriage’ is accomplished by the use of these *mantras*, in
the case of the twice-born castes; it is not so in the case of the
*śūdra*, in whose case no *mantras* are used; though, barring the
*mantras*, all the rest of the procedure is the same. It is in this
sense that the *mantras* are indicative of the sacramental rite of
‘marriage.’

Of these ‘*mantras*,’ the completion, end, is to be ‘*recognised*,’—‘*at
the seventh-step*.’ After the ‘offering of fried grains,’ the bride is
made to go round the fire thrice and then move forward seven steps, the
words addressed to her beginning with the words ‘*ekapadī bhava*’ and
ending with ‘*saptapadī bhava*,’ and when the ‘*seventh step*’ has been
thus taken by the bride, there can be no revoking, either on the part of
the bride’s father or on that of the bridegroom. So that even though she
be insane, she has to betaken as ‘wife,’ and cannot be abandoned.

There can be no such ‘marriage’ of a girl, who has already had sexual
intercourse; and in her case even though the entire procedure, up to the
‘offering of fried grains’ may have been gone through, she does not
become a ‘wife.’ So that in this case, a revoking of the bargain is
possible, just as in the case of any other commodity. Just as the
performance of the rites of ‘fire-laying,’ if done by a Śūdra, cannot
make the fire ‘*āhavanīya*’ (sacrificial),—or as the performance of the
fire-offerings and other details of the marriage-rite does not make it a
regular ‘marriage,’ if the bride happens to bn within
‘*sapiṇḍa-relationship*’ to the bride-groom. In fact these cases are
regarded as transgressions, as is clearly indicated by the following
declaration of Vaśiṣṭha:—‘By reason of having gone through the rites the
man becomes liable to expiation and the bride becomes unfit for being
married to any one else.’

“If a man, after having married a girl suffering from a disease
conducive to sterility, does not abandon her, what would be the remedy?”

If he has the wish and the capacity, he shall marry another girl; just
as in the case of one who has a sharp-tongued wife and whom ‘he shall
give up at once’ (Manu, 9.81).

In a case where, after she has given birth to a son and the man has set
up the lire, the wife happens to be attacked by some wasting
disease,—the husband shall not have her superseded; specially as the
circumstances under which supersession is permissible have been strictly
enumerated (9.77-85). Even then, if some one were to take to another
wife, by reason of the unchaste character of his former wife, we could
not prevent him.

In brief then, the rule relating to girls is that,—even though in the
case of ether commodities, there is rescission, by mutual understanding,
even after ten days,—there can be no such revoking in the case of girls
who have been married. Even in cases where girls are given in return for
prices paid, they are to be treated as other commodity only until
marriage has been performed. While in the case of one who is given away
in a purely religious spirit, there can be no revoking at all; so say
the texts. Though in such cases also, there is revocation,—as declared
by Yājñavalkya (I.65) ‘Even though she has been betrothed, the girl may
be taken back if a better bridegroom present himself,’—but only till the
‘seventh step’ has been taken. Once the ‘seventh step’ has been taken,
the gift cannot be rescinded; and hence there is no revoking in this
case; just as there is none in the case of such gifts as the cow and the
like. When once a cow has been given to a person, the gift cannot he
returned and taken back, oven by mutual understanding; because the act
of *giving* has been already accomplished at the time that the gift was
made. So that when once the gift has been accepted, if it were given
again to the original giver,—then this would only he an entirely
different act of gift, and not the revoking of the former gift.
Similarly in the case where both the bride and the bridegroom are
possessed of the requisite qualifications, there can be no rescission
(of the betrothal), even before the marriage has been performed. While
after the marriage has been performed, there can be no abandonment of
even a defective bride. Though if she happens to be one who has already
had intercourse, and is therefore not a ‘maiden’ at all,—she may be
abandoned; since marriage is enjoined as to be done with a ‘*maiden*.’
Marriage stands on the same footing as *using*; and just as the cloth
that has been used and worn cannot be returned to the seller oven within
ten days, so the maiden also who has been married cannot be abandoned.

This subject we shall deal with again under 9.47.—(227)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 585), to the
effect that ‘marriage’ is accomplished on the reaching of the seventh
step;—and again at p. 836, to the effect that the taking of the ‘seven
steps’ is absolutely essential.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 893), to the effect that the taking of
the seven steps constitutes an essential factor in the sanctificatory
rite of marriage;—again in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 107), to the same
effect;—again at p. 130, where the following notes are added—‘*niṣṭhā*,’
means *completion*, of ‘wife-hood,’—‘*saptame pāde*,’ *i.e*., on the
seven steps being reached by the girl;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p.
529);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 222);—and in *Hāralatā* (p. 52)
which has the following notes:—‘*Niyatam*’, *i.e*., bringing about
wife-hood, all the other details being mere accessories.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.226-227)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.226].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

विवाह्]आर्थे संस्कारे [पाणिग्र]हलक्षणे भवाह् पाणिग्राहणिकाः, तत्कर्मसाधनभूता मन्त्राः । नियतं दारलक्षणं दारोपसंग्रहलक्षणम्, कन्यानाम् एव गृह्यशास्त्रतो नाकन्यानाम् । तथा च दर्शयति- "विवाहे उदगयन आपूर्यमाणपक्षे पुण्याहे, कुमार्याः पाणिं गृह्णीयात् । त्रिषु त्रिषूत्तरादिषु । स्वातौ मृगशिरसि रोहिण्यां वा" इति । पुनश् चैतम् एवार्थं संदर्शयति- "कुमार्या भ्राता शमिपलाशमिश्राल् लाजान् अञ्जलिनाञ्जलाव् आवपति । ताञ् जुहोति सर्ट् हतेन (?) तिष्ठति" इति । यतश् चैतद् एव । अतस् **तेषां निष्ठा तु वुज्ञेया विद्वद्भिः सप्तमे पदे । तेषां** मन्त्राणां पाणिग्रहणप्रयोजनानां **सप्तमे पदे** निष्ठा परिसमाप्तिः । प्रेत्य तस्य कार्यतः प्राप्तव्यस्य सप्तलोकसंस्थस्य जगतः इयत्परिमाणत्वात् । सप्त हि लोका भूरादयः सत्यान्ताः; तान् असौ पदसंख्या संमितांस् तया सह श्रौतस्मार्तैः कर्मभिर् यातुम् इच्छति । तथा च मन्त्रः एतदर्थानुवाद्य् एव भवति- "सखा सप्तपदी भव" इति । एवं च सति, आसप्तभ्यः पदेभ्यः स्पृष्टमैथुनत्वेन विज्ञाता हेया भवति । ऊर्ध्वं तु सप्तमात् पदात् स्पृष्टमैथुनापि सती न परित्याज्या । तस्मान् निष्ठावचनलिङ्गाद् भवति । तथा च सति सहोढकानीनयोः शास्त्रोपदेशः समर्थो भवति । या तु रोगिणी सती धर्मप्रजननयोर् अन्यत्रसमर्था भवति, तां प्रतिगृह्य नोत्सृजेत । न ह तस्या धर्माविरोधे प्रजाविरोधे वा सति पुंसा कर्तव्यतान्यास्ति । अथाप्य् अस्यादृष्टार्थः सप्रयोगः, तथाप्य् असौ प्राग् अग्न्याधेयाद् अन्याम् उद्वाहयिष्यति । या तूभयोर् अपि धर्मप्रजननयोर् समर्था सा विद्यमानयातुल्येति परित्याज्यैव । अयं च कन्याव्यवहारः क्रयविक्रयानुशयसादृश्याद् एतस्मिन्न् अवधाव् उच्यत इति ॥ ८.२२६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

227	The nuptial texts are a certain proof (that a maiden has been made a lawful) wife; but the learned should know that they (and the marriage ceremony are complete with the seventh step (of the bride around the sacred fire).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/228_yasmin_yasmin.md">
<details open><summary><h3>228 यस्मिन् यस्मिन् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यस्मिन् यस्मिन् कृते कार्ये  
यस्येहानुशयो भवेत् ।  
तम् अनेन विधानेन  
धर्म्ये पथि निवेशयेत्  ॥ ८.२२८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/228_yasmin_yasmin.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Whenever any person should have repentance in regard to any compact that has been entered into—the king shall bring him to the righteous path, in the manner just described.—(228)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

न केवलं वणिजां पण्यधर्मो ऽयं दशाहिको ऽनुशयः, किं तर्हि, वेतनसंविद्वृद्धिप्रयोगादिषु **यस्मिन् यस्मिन्न्** इति वीप्सयाशेषकार्यपरिग्रहो ऽनेन **विधानेन** दाशाहिकेन विधिना । धर्माद् अनपेतो **धर्म्यः** । **पन्था** मार्गः । **निवेशयेत्** स्थापयेद् राजा । अतिदेशो ऽयम् **कृते कार्य** इति । प्रक्रान्ते पुनः सर्वेण सर्वनिवृत्तेः । यत्र ह्य् **अनुशयो भावेत्**[^८५] । स च[^८६] निरूपिते स्थापिते वान्तरे ऽनुशयो[^८७] दशाहप्रतीक्षणम् । 


[^८७]:
     M G: 'nuśamayya' J: 'nuśayya


[^८६]:
     J: vācā


[^८५]:
     J: tatrānuśayābhāvaḥ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;यत्र पुनर् वृद्ध्यर्थं धनं नीतम् ऋत्विक् च[^८८] वृतो वेतनं च[^८९] दत्तम्, कृतसमये विरोध आरब्धस् तत्र नायं धर्म इति <u>केचित्</u> । न हि कृतम् अकृतं भवति । 


[^८९]:
     M G: yad; DK: ca yad


[^८८]:
     M G: ṛtviktvād

<u>एतच्</u> च न कृतं[^९०] निवृत्तम् उच्यते, न प्रकान्तम् । न ह्य् अयम् "आदिकर्मणि क्तः" । न हि मुख्यार्थत्यागे कारणम् अस्ति । यत् तु कृतं नाकृतं भवतीति कृतम् अपि तत् साध्यकार्यप्रतिषेधाद् अकृतम् एव । यथा भुक्तं वान्तम् इति । लौकिकेष्व् अपि पदार्थेषु शास्त्रावसेयव्यवस्था । केषु शास्त्रत एव निवृत्त्यनिवृत्ती विज्ञेये । अथापि वृत्ताः पदार्थास् तथापि प्रत्याहरणं विधीयते । निष्पन्ने ऽपि धनप्रयोगे स्वस्थाननीतेष्व् अपि रूपकेषु प्रत्यानयनं कर्तव्यम् अन्यतरानुशयात् । क्षयव्ययाः शास्त्रधर्मेण नीतेषु वोढव्याः । तथा च गृहीतमात्रेषु मासिकीं वृद्धिम् इच्छन्ति । यत्रैवं बन्ध एष भोक्तव्य इयन्तं कालम् इत्य् एवमाद्य् अन्तर्दशाहम् अनुशये[^९१] निवर्त्यते । ऋत्विजां तु वरणं विवाह इव कन्यानाम् । संविदे दशाहाद् ऊर्ध्वं प्रवर्तितव्यम् अस्मिन्[^९२] शास्त्रे सति ॥ ८.२२८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The law relating to rescission within ten days is not restricted to
transactions among tradesmen; it is applicable also to compacts relating
to wages, interest and other kinds of transaction. The repetition of the
pronoun in the phrase ‘*yasmin yasmin*’ indicates that all kinds of
transaction are meant to be included.

This is an example of ‘extended application.’

When a compact has been entered into, and the work agreed upon has been
commenced, then it is that repentance sets in. When a compact has been
entered into verbally, the parties should therefore wait for ten days,
to see if there is repentance on either side.

In a case however where after money has been borrowed on interest, or a
priest has been appointed, and the wages have been paid,—if a quarrel
arises in regard to the terms of the compact,—then this case does not
come within the rule here laid down;—so say some people; on the ground
that what has been done cannot be undone.

This however is not right. It is only when a work has been *completed*
that it is regarded as ‘done,’—and not only when it *has been begun*;
because the past-participial affix in the term ‘done’ does not connote
*commencement* (but *accomplishment*), and there is no ground for
rejecting its primary connotation. As for the argument that ‘what has
been done cannot be undone’;—as a matter of fact, even when an act has
been *done*, if there is any obstruction in the way of the due
appearance of its effects, it is regarded to be as good as ‘undone.’ For
instance, when the food that has been eaten is thrown out.

Even in the case of ordinary things of the world, when they are found to
be amenable to the rules laid down in the scriptures, promulgation or
revocation must proceed on these same scriptural lines. Hence even
though the things may have become accomplished, there may be revocation.
Consequently, even after a money-transaction has been completed and the
money has been taken home by the borrower, it shall be brought back, if
either party shows signs of repentance. If there has been any
deterioration or expenditure, these shall he borne by the party
concerned, in accordance with the law laid down in the scriptures. It is
for this reason that some people hold that by merely receiving the loan,
the borrower becomes liable to a month’s interest.

In cases of mortgage also—when things are mortgaged on the understanding
that they shall he used for a stipulated time,—tho transaction is
revoked if there is repentance within ten days. As regards the
appointment of priests, it is like the marriage of girls. There can be
revocation after ten days only when there had been a compact; but only
if there is another scriptural text bearing on this subject.—(228)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 191), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Yasmin yasmin*’, the repetition of this general
pronoun implies that even in transactions other than sales,—such as loan
and so forth,—if there is ‘desire to withdraw’ or ‘repentance’, the same
rules are to be followed as those laid down in connection with the
Rescission of Sales,—such as returning, receiving back, fine of 600
*paṇas* and so forth, in accordance with the circumstances of each case;
‘*anena*,’ *i.e*., by the method Laid down in connection with the
Rescission of Sales and Purchases;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 88);—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (108b).
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

आधिवेतनसमयाद्यनुशयेषु दशाह एव निष्ठा स्यात् ॥ ८.२२७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

228	If anybody in this (world) repent of any completed transaction, (the king) shall keep him on the road of rectitude in accordance with the rules given above.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/229_pashuShu_svAminAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>229 पशुषु स्वामिनाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पशुषु स्वामिनां चैव  
पालानां च व्यतिक्रमे ।  
विवादं संप्रवक्ष्यामि  
यथावद् धर्मतत्त्वतः  ॥ ८.२२९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/229_pashuShu_svAminAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

I am going to expound fully the true law relating to disputes between owners and keepers arising from transgressions regarding cattle.—(229)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

गवादि**पशु**विषये **व्यतिक्रमे** **स्वामिनां** **पालानां** च गोपालादीनां यो **विवादः** — "गौस् त्वया मे नाशिता तां मे देहि" इति — पालो ऽपि विप्रतिपद्यते — "मदीयो दोषो नाभवत्" — इत्य् अत्र वादपदे यद् **धर्मतत्त्वं** यादृशी व्यवस्था ताम् **यथावन्** निपुणतो **वक्ष्यामीत्य्** अवधानार्थः पिण्डीकृतप्रकरणोपन्यासः ॥ ८.२२९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In regard to ‘*cattle*’— such as cows and the like—there may be some
‘*transgressions*’; and from those may arise ‘*disputes between their
owners and keepers*’;—the owner saying—‘you have destroyed my cow, give
her to me’;—on which the keeper retorts—‘There was no neglect on my
part.’ The ‘*true law*’—the established rule—that governs such
disputes—that ‘*I am going to describe fully*.’

This summing up of the sense of the entire section is put forth for the
purpose of securing the attention of the audience.—(229)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 170), which adds that
‘*paśuṣu*’ stands for such cattle as form the subject-matter of
dispute;—in *Parāśaramādhava*, (Vyavahāra, p. 262), which explains
‘*vivādam*’ as method of settling the dispute;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(104 b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.229-230)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (5.137-138).—‘Cattle being attacked, during daytime, by wolves
or other ferocious animals, and the keeper not going to repel the
attack, the blame shall fall upon him;—and he shall make good to the
owner the value of the cattle that may have perished.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.164).—‘The cowherd shall deliver, in the evening, the
cattle exactly as they had been made over to him; if any cattle dies or
becomes lost through his negligence, the hired cowherd should be made to
replace them.’

*Nārada* (6.11-13).—‘Those cows which a cowherd takes to the pasture
every day when the night is over, he shall bring back again in the
evening, after they have eaten and drunk. If such a cow meets with an
accident, he shall struggle to save her as best he may; if he is unable
to rescue her, he shall go quickly to announce it to his master. Should
he neither struggle to save her, nor raise a cry, nor announce it to his
master, the cowherd shall make good the value of the cow to the owner,
and must pay a fine to the King.’

*Bṛhaspati* (16.20).—‘A cowherd saves cattle from danger of reptiles,
robbers and tigers, and from caverns or pits; let him try his best to
protect them, call out for help, and give notice to his master.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उपन्यासार्थश्लोकः ॥ ८.२२८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

229	I will fully declare in accordance with the true law (the rules concerning) the disputes, (arising) from the transgressions of owners of cattle and of herdsmen.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/230_divA_vaktavyatA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>230 दिवा वक्तव्यता ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

दिवा वक्तव्यता पाले  
रात्रौ स्वामिनि तद्गृहे ।  
योगक्षेमे ऽन्यथा चेत् तु  
पालो वक्तव्यताम् इयात्  ॥ ८.२३० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/230_divA_vaktavyatA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Responsibility for the safe keeping during the day rests with the keeper, and during the night, with the owner, ip in his own house; if otherwise, the keeper should be responsible.—(230)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**दिवा** पशूनां **योगक्षेमे** दोष उत्पन्ने "नष्टं विनष्टम्" (म्ध् ८.२३२) इत्यादिके वक्ष्यमाणे **पाले** **वक्तव्यता** कुत्सनीयता । तेन स दोषो निवोढव्यः । **रात्रौ स्वामिनो** दोष उद्बन्धनादिमृतानाम् । **तद्गृहे** स्वामिगृहे यदि पालेन प्रवेशिता भवन्ति । **अन्यथा चेत् तु** यदि रात्राव् अपि पालेन न प्रवेशिता अरण्य एव वर्तन्ते तदा पालो दोषभाक् स्यात् । एतद् उक्तं भवति । पालहस्तगता गावो यदा क्षेत्रे कस्यचित् सस्यं भक्षयन्ति केनचिद् वा हन्यन्ते तदा पालस्य । अथ पालेन समर्पितास् तदा स्वामिनः । अयोगक्षेमे **योगक्षेम**शब्दः प्रयुक्तो लक्षणया । यथान्धे चक्षुष्मान् इति ॥ ८.२३० ॥

_को ऽसौ योगक्षेमः । अतः प्रपञ्चयति ।_
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If there arises any neglect regarding the safe keeping of the cattle,
‘*during the day*,’— such as those going to be described under
232,—‘*the responsibility*’—blame—‘*rests with the keeper*’; and he has
to bear the blame

‘*During the night*,’ the blame lies with the owner,—if the animals die
while tied up;—‘*if in his house*,’—if they have been safely penned in
the house by the keeper.

‘*If otherwise*,’—*i.e*., if they have not been brought into the house
during the night, and have been kept in the pastures,—the blame lies
with the keeper.

The meaning is as follows:—During the time that the cattle are under the
charge of the keeper, if they graze in the cultivated field of a man, or
if they are killed,—the fault lies with the keeper; but if anything
happens after they have been made over to the owner, then it lies with
this latter.

As the blame is in connection with *non-safety*, the term
‘*yoga-kṣema*,’ ‘*safety*,’ should be taken as figuratively indicating
its opposite; just as the epithet ‘beautiful-eyed’ is applied to a blind
man.—(230)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara*, (p. 171) which says:—If there
is anything remiss in the safety of the cows during the day, the
‘*vaktavyatā*,’ responsibility, blame, lies on the keeper; if it is at
night, then on the owner;—but if the ‘*yogakṣemam*’ (which is its
reading for ‘*yogakṣeme*,’ *i.e*.,) the agreement between the keeper and
the owner, is ‘otherwise,’ then during the night also, the keeper is
responsible.’

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 772), which explains ‘*vaktavyatā*’ as
fault or blame;—and in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 530), which quotes Kullūka, who
explains the second half as meaning that ‘if during the night also the
cattle are in charge of the keeper, then if there is any thing wrong,
the blame lies on the keeper’;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi*, (p. 81).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.229-230)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.229].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पर्तीतार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.२२९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

230	During the day the responsibility for the safety (of the cattle rests) on the herdsman, during the night on the owner, (provided they are) in his house; (if it be) otherwise, the herdsman will be responsible (for them also during the night).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/231_gopaH_xIrabhRto.md">
<details open><summary><h3>231 गोपः क्षीरभृतो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

गोपः क्षीरभृतो यस् तु  
स दुह्याद् दशतो वराम् ।  
गोस्वाम्यनुमते भृत्यः  
सा स्यात् पाले ऽभृते भृतिः  ॥ ८.२३१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/231_gopaH_xIrabhRto.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the hired cattle-keeper is one paid with milk, he shall, with the owner’s permission, milk the best out of ten; this shall be the ‘wages’ of the keeper, if he receives no other wages.—(231)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

गाः पाति **गोपः** गोपालकः । स कदाचिद् भक्तादिना भ्रियते कदाचित् क्षीरेण । तत्र **क्षीरभृतो** **दशभ्यो** **वराम्** श्रेष्ठाम्, अवराम्[^९३] वा, संहितायाम् अकारप्रश्लेषात् । रक्षायां अनुरूपकता । यस्य नान्यद् अन्नं स एकस्या गोः क्षीरम् आदद्यात् दशतः । अनया कल्पनया न्यूनाधिकरक्षणे[^९४] भृतिः कल्पयितव्या । एवं दोह्यादोह्यधेनुवत्सतरीदम्यवत्सकादिचारणे[^९५] क्वचित् त्रिभागः क्षीरस्य क्वचिच् चतुर्भागः स्वामिभिः कल्पयितव्यः । 


[^९५]:
     M G J: -vāraṇe


[^९४]:
     M G: -rakṣaṇaṃ


[^९३]:
     M G: varān śreṣṭhān avarān

दिङ्मात्रप्रदर्शनार्थश्लोको ऽयम् । देशव्यवस्था त्व् आश्रयणीया । भृतिं निरूपयिष्यामीति ग्रामगोपालेन यदि गावस् त्यक्ता भवन्ति न तेन स्वामिनम् अननुज्ञाप्य दशमी गौर् दोह्येति । भक्तभृतो ऽपि "क्षीरेण विनिमयेयम्[^९६]" इति बुद्ध्या दुहीत, तन्निवृत्त्यर्थम् उक्तं **गोस्वाम्यनुमत** इति । स्वामिनो ऽनुमतिम् अन्तरेण प्रवर्तमानो दण्ड्यः ।   

**सा** अनन्तरोक्ता । **अभृते** भक्तादिना **भृतिर्** भवेत् । क्षीरभृतो वा एषा वृत्तिः[^९७] । भृत्यो भरणार्थं न धर्माय प्रवृत्तो गोरक्षायाम् । 



[^९७]:
     M G DK: bhṛtiḥ

- अथ वा स्वेच्छया दशम्या गोः क्षीरम् आददानश् चोरः स्यात् । अस्मिंस् त्व् अनुज्ञाते भृतिस् तस्येयम् इति न दोषः । 

- अत्रापि स्वामिनो ऽननुमत्या दोष एवेति चेत्, सत्यम्, कल्प्या काचिद् दण्डमात्रा । न चौरो भवति । अस्मिंस् तु चौरो निक्षेपहारी वा स्यात् । 

अयं श्लोक आदौ वक्तव्यः । अतो ऽनन्तरः क्वचित् पठ्यते ॥ ८.२३१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The author is going to describe the details regarding the ‘*safe
keeping*’ (mentioned in the preceding verse).

One who ‘keeps’ the ‘cattle’ is the ‘*cattle-keeper*,’ the herdsman.
Sometimes he is engaged on fooding and other kinds of wages, and
sometimes on milk. Of these he who is ‘*paid with milk shall milk the
best*—*varām*—*out of ten*’;—or the ‘*worst*,’ ‘*avarām*,’—the initial
‘a’ being mixed up with the preceding vowel.

The wages are to be commensurate with the labour involved in the
keeping. If the man receives nothing else,—in the shape of
subsistence,—he shall take the milk of one cow. The exact wages, more or
less, of the man shall be determined according to this rate. Thus for
the work of looking after milch and non-milch cows, heifers, bulls and
calves, the owner shall apportion to the keeper sometimes the third, and
sometimes the fourth, part of the entire milk-produce.

This verse is meant only to alîord some indication of the subject. In
fact in each individual case, local custom has got to be followed.

If the herdsman of the village omits to look after the eattle, with the
idea of having his wages fixed beforehand, then he shall not. milk one
of the ten cows, without having obtained the owner’s permission.

‘*With the owner’s permission*’;—this has been added for the purpose of
precluding the possibility of the keeper taking the milk in lieu of the
‘fooding’ on which he has been engaged. The meaning is that if he milks
the cow without the owner’s permission, he shall he punished.

‘*This*’—*i.e*., what has been just mentioned—‘*shall be the wages if he
receive no other wages*’; *i.e*., this shall be the wages of the keeper
engaged ‘on milk.’

‘*Hired*’—*i.e*., he who takes up the work of keeping the cattle for the
purpose of making a living, and not for acquiring spiritual merit.

Or, the meaning of the verse may he that “if the man, entirely out of
his own wish, takes the milk of every tenth cow, he shall he regarded as
a thief; but if he has obtained the owner’s permission, then it becomes
his due ‘wages,’ and there is nothing wrong.”

“But in the case mentioned in the verse also, if the man took the milk
without the owner’s permission, he would be doing something wrong.”

True; but in this case he would be only liable to punishment, and he
would not be a ‘thief’; while in the other case he would be either a
‘thief’ or a ‘misappropriator of a trust.’

This verse should have gone before; some people read it later on.—(231)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 170), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Kṣīrabhṛtaḥ*’, whose wages consist of milk
only;—‘*duḥyad daśato varām*,’ he should milk that cow (for himself)
which is the best among ten cows;—‘*sā*,’ the said milk of the one
cow;—‘*pāle*’, for the cowherd;—‘*abhṛte*,’ who is not paid any thing
else in the shape of fooding, clothing, and so forth.

This is quoted in *Aparārka*, (p. 772) winch adds the following
explanation:—That keeper of the cattle who has his wages paid in milk,
shall, with the owner’s permission, milk the best cow among ten milch
cows, taking that for himself,—this being the ‘wage’ of the
cattle-keeper who does not receive wages in any other form;—in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 80), which explains ‘*Kṣīrabhṛtaḥ*’ as ‘one whose
wages are paid in the form of milk only’;—he shall milk the best of ten
cows;—‘*abhṛte*’, the keeper who gets no fooding and clothing,—and notes
that this refers to the keeper of milch-cattle only:—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(104b), which explains ‘*Ksīrabhṛtaḥ*’ as ‘one whose wages consist of
milk only; he shall milk for himself that cow which may be the best
among ten cows—but only once’; —‘*abhṛte*’ one who receives no food or
clothing;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 136b), which says that the
milk of the best among ten cows is to be taken by the cowherd only when
he receives nothing else as wages.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.139).—‘If the cowherd milks a cow without permission, he
shall pay twenty-five *Kārṣāpaṇas* as a line.’

*Nārada* (6.10).—‘For tending a hundred cows, a heifer shall be given to
the cowherd as his wages every year; for tending two hundred cows, a
milch cow, and he shall be allowed to milk all the cows every eighth
day.’

*Bṛhaspati* (16.19).—‘A man hired for attendance on the wild cows of
another person shall receive the whole milk every eighth day.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**क्षीरभृतो** [न] भ्क्ताच्छादनभृतो, द्विविधो यस्माद् गोपः । अत इदं विशेष्यते । **क्षीरभृतो यस् तु गोपः** **स दुहेद् दशतः** दशभ्यो धेनुभ्य एकां **वरां** श्रेष्ठाम् इत्य् अर्थः । ताम् अपि च **गोस्वाम्य्** अनुमतः, न स्वेच्छया, **सा स्यात् पाले** भृत्यन्तरेण्**आभृते भृतिः **। एवं च सति पञ्चावस्थासु गोषु बह्ववस्थासु वा गोस्वामिभिर् गोपैश् च त्रिभागः क्षीरस्य कल्पितः परिकल्प्य भोग्याभोग्यरूपाण्य् अनेनैव शास्त्रेण, येनाइतस्माद् एव च दर्शनात् क्षीरभृतिः पशूनां संरकणे न दोषायाप्रतिषेधात् तस्या इति । एवं च सति — ॥ ८.२३० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

231	A hired herdsman who is paid with milk, may milk with the consent of the owner the best (cow) out of ten; such shall be his hire if no (other) wages (are paid).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/232_naShTaM_vinaShTam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>232 नष्टं विनष्टम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

नष्टं विनष्टं कृमिभिः  
श्वहतं विषमे मृतम् ।  
हीनं पुरुषकारेण  
प्रदद्यात् पाल एव तु  ॥ ८.२३२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/232_naShTaM_vinaShTam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The keeper alone should make good what has strayed, or been destroyed by worms, or killed by dogs, or has perished in an unsafe place,—if it was left without human aid.—(232)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**नष्टं** दृष्टिपथाद् अपेतं न ज्ञायते क्व गतम् । **विनष्टं** **कृमिभिः** । आरोहकनामानः कृमयो गवां प्रजनवर्त्मनानुप्रविश्य नाशयन्ति । **श्वभिर् हतम्**[^९८] । प्रदर्शनार्थम् एतत् । तेन गोमायुव्याघ्रादिहतानाम् एषैव स्थितिः । **विषमे** श्वभ्रदरीशिलादिसंकटादौ **मृतं** **। प्रदद्यात् पाल एव** । **हीनं पुरुषकारेण** । पुरुषकारः[^९९] पुरुषव्यापारः । पालस्य तत्र संनिधानात् वृकनिवारणं च दण्डादिना प्रवृत्तिः । तेनापेतम् । यदि व्याप्रियमाणो व्याघ्रादेर् निवारणे नैव समर्थः, सहसैव वोत्पत्य[^१००] कश्चित् पशुर् वेगेन श्वभ्रं गच्छेद् अनुगच्छतापि न शक्यः प्रत्यावर्तयितुम्, न पाले दोषः ॥ ८.२३२ ॥


[^१००]:
     M G: sahasaivotpatya


[^९९]:
     M G omit: puruṣakāraḥ


[^९८]:
     DK (1:908): śvahataṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Strayed*’—the cattle that has disappeared from sight, and one does not
know where it has gone to.

‘*Destroyed by worms*’;—Worms called ‘*ārśaka*’ enter through the
genital organs of the cow and kill it.

‘*Killed by dogs*’;—this is mentioned only by way of illustration; so
that the same rule applies to the case of cattle being killed by
jackals, tigers and other wild animals.

‘*In an unsafe place*’;—such as holes, pits, stony places and so forth.

All this ‘*the keeper shall make good*.’—‘*if it has been left without
human aid*.’—The ‘human aid’ in such cases would consist in remaining
near the cattle and lighting the stick for keeping away wolves and other
animals; and when they are left without all this care. In a case where
the man, himself on the point of death, is unable to scare away the
tiger—or where if the cattle, running fast, happen to fall into a pit,
from which it could not be turned back by the keeper, even when he would
be following it,—no fault can lie with the keeper.—(232)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kṛmibhiḥ*’—‘A special kind of worm called *Ārohakas*’ (Medhātithi)
‘snakes and so forth’ (Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 773), which adds that the keeper
is to make good the loss by paying the price of the animal lost;—and
that ‘*nāśa*’ of the animal here meant is its being not found, lost;—in
*Mitākṣarā* (2.164), as describing the loss of cattle through
carelessness;—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 173), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Naṣṭam*,’ stolen;—‘*vinaṣṭam*,’ destroyed—by whom?—‘*by
worms*’;—the ‘dog’ stands for other animals also;—‘*viṣame*,’ place
difficult of access; such as the hill-top and so
forth;—‘*puruṣakāreṇa*,’ care and means of rescue adopted by the
keeper;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 81), which has the following
notes:—‘*Naṣṭam*’ stolen by thieves and others,—*i.e*., what became lost
for want proper care on the part of the keeper,—this negligence being
the reason why the man should be made to make good the loss;—in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (105a), which says that ‘*śva*’ in ‘*śvahatam*’ stands
for carnivorous animals in general;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
1362), which explains ‘*viṣame*’ as ‘in an inaccessible place,’ and
‘*hīnaṃ puruṣakāreṇa*’ as ‘what has been destroyed for want of that care
which was possible for man to give.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.138).—‘The cowherd shall make good to the owner the value of
the cattle that may have perished.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.165).—‘If a cattle is destroyed through the fault of
the cowherd, he shall be fined 13½ *Paṇas* and made to make good the
value of the cattle to the owner.’

*Nārada* (6.13-15).—‘Should the cowherd neither struggle to save the
cow, nor raise a cry, nor announce it to his master, he must make good
the value of the cow to the owner, and pay a fine to the King. The
cowherd shall make good the value of the cow that has strayed, or been
destroyed by worms, or slain by dogs, or met her death by tumbling into
a pit,—if he did not duly exert himself to prevent such accidents.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 171).—‘If a cowherd who has received
wages leaves the cattle in the desolate forest and roams about in the
village, he should be beaten by the King. If a cow under the charge of a
cowherd dies through his fault, he should be punished and made to pay a
fee to the owner of the cow. If however the cow dies at the house of the
owner, through disease or such causes, the owner should he punished and
made to pay the wages of the cowherd.’

*Āpastamba* (2.28.6).—‘If a herdsman who has taken cattle under his
care, allows them to perish, or loses them through his negligence, he
shall make them good to the owners.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

गोपप्रमादेन ॥ ८.२३१ ॥

_अस्यापवादः_ ।
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

232	The herdsman alone shall make good (the loss of a beast) strayed, destroyed by worms, killed by dogs or (by falling) into a pit, if he did not duly exert himself (to prevent it).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/233_vighuShya_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>233 विघुष्य तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

विघुष्य तु हृतं चौरैर्  
न पालो दातुम् अर्हति ।  
यदि देशे च काले च  
स्वामिनः स्वस्य शंसति  ॥ ८.२३३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/233_vighuShya_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But the keeper shall not have to make good what has been taken away by thieves openly,—if he informs his own master of it at the proper place and time.—(233)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**विघुष्य** आघुष्य पटहान्[^१०१] **चौरैर् हृतं** पशुं[^१०२] **पालो न** दाप्यते । विघोषणं च पालस्याशक्त्युपलक्षणार्थम् । यदि बहवश् चोराः प्रसह्य च मुष्णन्ति तदा पालो मुच्यते । सो ऽपि यदि प्राप्तकालं तस्याम् एव वेलायां स्वामिनः कथयति । **देशे** यत्र स्वामी संनिहितः । कथं विज्ञातस् तत्र[^१०३] अथ वा निवासदेशे स्वामिनः । तत्र यद्य् असाव् असंनिहितो ऽपि भवति तथापि तत्स्थानीयो भवति, यो राजानम् अधिकारिणं वा ज्ञापयित्वा चौरान् अभिद्रवति । **स्वस्येति** राजनिवृत्त्यर्थम् । स्वो हि स्वामी स्वद्रव्यमोक्षणे यत्नं कुरुते न तथा पालज्ञापितो राजा । दुष्करा च राजज्ञपना पालस्य । अथ मुषित्वा गतेषु ज्ञापयेद् दुष्येद् एव ॥ ८.२३३ ॥


[^१०३]:
     DK: kathaṃcit jñātas tatra


[^१०२]:
     M G: paśuḥ


[^१०१]:
     M G: paṭahānyudghoṣaṇam; DK (1: 908): paṭahādyudghoṣaṇam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

But the keeper shall not have to make good what has been taken away by
thieves openly,—if he informs his own master of it at the proper place
and time.

‘*Openly*’—publicly, with beat of drums;—when the cattle is thus taken
away by thieves, the keeper is not made to pay for it. The term ‘openly’
is meant to indicate the helplessness of the keeper; the sense being
that in a case where there are a large number of thieves, and they have
taken away the cattle by force,—the keeper is let off; specially if he
‘*at the proper time*—*i.e*., immediately—informs the master,—‘*at the
proper place*’—*i.e*., wherever the master may happen to be.

“But how could the man know whether the master was on the spot or at his
house?”

There is no force in this; even in a case where the master is not on the
spot, some substitute of his is bound to be there, who would inform the
king or his officer and would have the thieves pursued.

‘*His own*’;—this has been added for the purpose of precluding the
possibility of the information being given directly to the king. The
keeper’s own master could make every effort to recover his property—on
being informed by the keeper;—not so the king;—and further, it would be
extremely difficult for the keeper to convey any information to the king
directly.

If the keeper gives the information after the thieves have gone away
after taking the cattle,—the blame would lie with him.—(233)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka*, (p. 772), which explains ‘*Kilviṣī*’
(its reading being ‘*na* *pālastatra kilviṣī*,’ for ‘*na* *pālo
dādumarhati*’) as ‘blame-worthy’;—in *Mitākṣarā* (2.164) to the effect
that the keeper should not be made to pay to the owner the value of such
cattle as are carried away by thieves ‘*by force*,’ *i*.*e*., openly, by
beat of drums and so forth;—provided that he reports it to the owner at
the same time and places (this latter being added in *Bālambhatṭṭī* as
explaining the latter half of the verse);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi*, (p. 81)
which explains ‘*deśe*’ as ‘place where a search could be made;’—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru*, (105a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 137a),
which explains ‘*vighuṣya*’ as ‘with a flourish of the trumpet’ and so
forth,—‘*deśe*’ as at ‘the place where the master lives’,—and *kāle* as
‘immediately after the robbery’.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada*.—(6.12, 16).—‘If a cow under the cowherd’s charge meets with am
accident, he shall struggle to save her as best he may. If he is unable
to rescue her, he shall hasten to announce the fact to his master. For
an animal seized by robbers, though he raised a cry, the cowherd shall
not be made to pay; provided he gives notice to his master at the proper
time and place.’

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 172).—‘If a cattle perishes or is taken
away, when the cowherd has been captured, or during an attack on the
village, or during anarchy,—the cowherd shall not he held to blame.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

हरण**देशे** हरण**काले** च विघुष्य अनन्तरं **स्वामिन** आख्याते **पालो** न दद्यात् । स्वयं मृत्युनापि च मृतेषु प्रयत्नवतो गोपस्य स इदं कुर्यात् ॥ ८.२३२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

233	But for (an animal) stolen by thieves, though he raised an alarm, the herdsman shall not pay, provided he gives notice to his master at the proper place and time.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/234_karNau_charma.md">
<details open><summary><h3>234 कर्णौ चर्म ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

कर्णौ चर्म च वालांश् च  
बस्तिं स्नायुं च रोचनाम् ।  
पशुषु स्वामिनां दद्यान्  
मृतेष्व् अङ्कानि दर्शयेत् [मेधातिथिपाठः - अङ्कांश् च दर्शयेत्]  ॥ ८.२३४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/234_karNau_charma.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

On the death of the animals, he shall make over to the owner their ears, skin, tail-hairs, bladder and tendons and the concrete bile, and also point out their marks.—(231)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

आयुषः क्षयान् **मृतेषु पशुषु स्वामिनः कर्णाद्य्** अर्पणीयम् । **गोरोचनां** गवां शृङ्गेषु चूर्णं भवति । **बस्तिर्** अङ्गविशेषः । **अङ्काः** कर्णादयः, स्वामिविशेषज्ञानार्थं चिह्नानि । तान् अपि दर्शयेत् । एवं पालस्य शुद्धिः । अङ्कदर्शनेन हि प्रत्यभिज्ञा भवत्य् अयं स पशुर् इति ॥ ८.२३४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When, on the expiry of their lives, the animals have died, the ears and
other limbs should be made over to the owner.

The ‘*concrete bile*’ is a powder obtained from the horns of cows.

‘*Bladder*’—is a particular part of the body.

‘*Marks*’—such as ‘cleft ears’ and the like, which serve to distinguish
the animals;—these should be pointed out.

In this manner, does the keeper become absolved from blame.

By seeing the marks the particular animal becomes identified.—(234)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.164), to the effect, that if the
cattle placed in charge of a keeper should die by chance, then he should
make over its ear and other things to the owner;—where *Bālambhaṭṭī*
adds the following notes:—‘*Charma*’, skin;—‘*bālān*’, hairs, as
indicating the death of the animal;—‘*basti*,’ a part of the urinary
organ;—‘*snāyu*’ is fat;—‘*pūyāni*’ is another reading;—‘*rocanā*’, the
yellow pigment in the cow’s eyes;—all these should be shown to the owner
of the cattle;—when these die; and other parts of its body also should
be brought up; such as the horns, hoofs and so forth, which would
indicate the particular animal that may have died. If we read
‘*Aṅkāṃśca*,’ it would mean the marks made on the body of the animal
should be shown; in the reading ‘*aṅkāni*’ or ‘*aṅgāni*,’ the meaning
would be that while showing the marks, he should hand over the ears &c.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 175), which notes that all that is
meant by mentioning the ‘ears’ &c. is that the distinguishing features
of the dead animal should be shown. It explains ‘*mṛteṣu*’ as ‘in the
case of those dying at a distance’, and ‘*aṅgāni*’ as such comparatively
lasting parts of the body as the horns and so forth. It notes that
‘*aṅgādi*’ is another reading for ‘*aṅgāni*’, in which case ‘*ādi*’
stands for such other *signs of this animal* as may be well known.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 265), as laying down
that in the case of animals dying by chance, its ear &c. should be shown
to the owner;—in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 96), as laying down sure
evidence of the death of cattle; it explains ‘*aṅka*’ as the horn and so
forth, ‘as explained by Madana’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
137a), which notes the readings ‘*aṅgādi*’, ‘*aṅgāni*’ and
‘*aṅkādi*’,—it explains ‘*aṅka*’ as ‘such marks of recognition as the
horn, the ears and so forth’,—and adds that ‘*ādi*’ is meant to include
*witnesses*.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (6.17).—‘In the ease of the death of an animal entrusted to his
care, the herdsman is free from blame, if he can produce the tail, the
horns and other things.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

विधिर् अयं] चाविशेषः ॥ ८.२३३ ॥

_[अजा]विकार्थम् इदम् आह ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

234	If cattle die, let him carry to his master their ears, skin, tails, bladders, tendons, and the yellow concrete bile, and let him point out their particular. marks.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/235_ajAvike_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>235 अजाविके तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अजाविके तु संरुद्धे  
वृकैः पाले त्व् अनायति ।  
यां प्रसह्य वृको हन्यात्  
पाले तत् किल्बिषं भवेत्  ॥ ८.२३५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/235_ajAvike_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When goats and sheep have been surrounded by wolves, and the keeper does not come for ward,—if the wolf forcibly kill any, the blame shall lie with the keeper.—(235)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अजा चाविका च **अजाविके** । अविर् एवाविकैडका । एते **वृकैः** शृगालप्रभृतिभिः **संरुद्धे** अवष्टब्धे, न[^१०४] प्रथमपात एव हते । अस्मिंश् चान्तरे सत्य् आमोक्षणे ऽहतत्वात्, न च पाल आयाति मोक्षयितुम्, **अनायत्य्** अनागच्छति **पाले** यत् तत्र **प्रसह्य** बलेनाभिभूय **वृको हन्यात्** पालस्य स दोषः । स्वामिनो दापयितव्यः । प्रायश्चित्तं चरेत् । गोर् महत्त्वाद् गोमायुना न शक्यते संरोद्धुम् इत्य् **अजाविके** इत्य् उच्यते, न पुनस् तद्रूपम् । अतश् च बालानां गोवत्सानाम् एष एव न्यायः ॥ ८.२३५ ॥


[^१०४]:
     M G omit: na
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Goats and Sheep*,’—‘Sheep’ also includes the wild goat.

When these have been ‘*surrounded* *by* *wolves*’—jackals and the
rest—and they are not killed outright at the very first onset,—so that
there is time to come forward and rescue the animals,—and yet ‘*the
keeper does not come forward*’—to rescue them; under such circumstances,
if the wolf should ‘*forcibly kill any*,’— the blame lies with the
keeper. That is, he should he made to make it good to the owner, and
also perform an expiatory rite.

Cows are large animals, and hence cannot he ‘surrounded’ by jackals,
etc.; hence the present verse has specified ‘*goals and sheep*’; it does
not follow that the rule applies to these animals only; so that this
same rule applies to the case of young calves also.—(235)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 773):—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p.
175), which notes that ‘goats and sheep’ stand for all such animals as
are liable to be attacked by wolves; and explains ‘*Samruddhe*’ as
*attacked*;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 265), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Anāyati*’, not coming to ward off the
attack,—‘*yām*’, animal belonging to the category of ‘goats and
sheep—this pertains to cases where the attack takes place in easily
accessible places; in the case of its coming in a place which is
inaccessible, no blame attaches to the keeper;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(105b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 137a), which explains
‘*anāyati*’ as ‘if he does not come to avert the danger.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Narada* (6.15).—‘If goats and sheep are surrounded by wolves, and the
herdsman does not come to their assistance, he shall he responsible for
any animal that the wolf attacks or kills.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.137-138).—‘Cattle being attacked, during daytime, by wolves
or other ferocious animals, and the keeper not going to repel the
attack, the blame shall fall upon him; and he shall make good to the
owner the value of the cattle that has perished.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पशुरक्षकस्य सतस् तदसंनि[धाने वा वृको हन्यात् स एव] दद्यात् । यस्माद् अवरुद्धानां संनिहितो न भवति । वृकग्रहणं चान्येषाम् अपि प्रदर्शनार्थम् ॥ ८.२३४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

235	But if goats or sheep are surrounded by wolves and the herdsman does not hasten (to their assistance), lie shall be responsible for any (animal) which a wolf may attack and kill.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/236_tAsA~n_ched.md">
<details open><summary><h3>236 तासाञ् चेद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

तासां चेद् अवरुद्धानां  
चरन्तीनां मिथो वने ।  
याम् उत्प्लुत्य वृको हन्यान्  
न पालस् तत्र किल्बिषी  ॥ ८.२३६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/236_tAsA~n_ched.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When however, they are grazing together in the forest, duly protected,—if a wolf pounces upon one and kills it,—the keeper is not to blame.—(236)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"अजाविके"[^१०५] पूर्वश्लोके जात्यपेक्षं द्विवचनम् । पशुशकुनिद्वन्द्वत्वाद् विभाषितैकवद्भावः । इह तु **तासाम्** इति व्यक्त्यपेक्षो बहुवचने परामर्शः । **अवरुद्धानां** **मिथ** एकत्र प्रदेशे स्थापितानां संहतीभूतानां दिग्भ्यो विदिग्भ्यश् च निरुद्धगमनानां **वने चरन्तीनां** दृष्टिगोचराणाम्, यदि कुतश्चन कुञ्जात् संचारणोत्पतनानुक्रमेण निष्क्रम्य **वृको हन्यान्** **न पालो** दोषभाग् । अशक्यं ह्य् अनेकवृक्षक्षुपशरवल्लीगहनं वनं निर्विवरीकर्तुम्, छिद्रानुसारिणश् च वृकाः । **मिथो**ग्रहणाच् चातिदूरविप्रकृष्टासु वधे दोष एव । पालहस्तगताः पशवस् तदुपेक्षायां यदि दोषम् आप्नुयुः स पालेनैव समाधेय इति सिद्धे एष प्रपञ्चः सुखावबोधार्थः ॥ ८.२३६ ॥


[^१०५]:
     M G DK: ajāvika-
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the preceding verse the dual number in ‘*ajāvike*’ (‘goats and
sheep’) is based upon the fact that *two* kinds of animals are meant;
though in reality, being a copulative compound of the names of
‘animals,’ it should have taken the singular ending. In the present
verse we have the feminine plural, in consideration of the individual
animals concerned.

‘*Duty protected*,’ ‘*together*’;—kept together, flocked in one place;
having their movements hitherto duly checked;—while grazing in the
forest, before the eyes of the keeper;—if a wolf should suddenly emerge
out of a thicket and pounce upon and kill one of them;—in this case the
keeper is not to be blamed. Because it is absolutely impossible for a
man to shut out every little opening in the forest, consisting as it
does of endless trees and thickets and creepers; and wolves are always
on the lookout for such openings.

The addition of the term ‘*together*’ shows that if they are allowed to
roam about long distances, then if any is killed, the blame does lie
with the keeper. The animals are in the hands of the keeper; so that if
they come to harm through his carelessness, it should be made good by
the keeper himself. It is for the purpose of making this simple fact
easily understood that the author has had recourse to these detailed
assertions.—(236)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 175), which explains
‘*mithaḥ*’ as ‘herded together’,—‘*tatra*’ *i.e*., on the death of the
cow;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 265), which explains
‘*avaruddhānām*’ as ‘herded together by the keeper’ and in *Aparārka*
(p. 773).
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अशक्यत्वाद् अटव्यां बहुवृक्षक्षुपगर्तायां तत्संरक्षणस्य मिथश् चरन्तीनां न पालापराधः । एतेन गोमहिष्यादि व्याख्यातम् । उक्तो गोसंरक्षणविधिः । पशुपीडापशुसंहारार्थम् इदम् उच्य[ते] ॥ ८.२३५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

236	But if they, kept in (proper) order, graze together in the forest, and a wolf, suddenly jumping on one of them, kills it, the herdsman shall bear in that case no responsibility.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/237_dhanuHshatam_parIhAro.md">
<details open><summary><h3>237 धनुःशतम् परीहारो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

धनुःशतं परीहारो  
ग्रामस्य स्यात् समन्ततः ।  
शम्यापातास् त्रयो वापि  
त्रिगुणो नगरस्य तु  ॥ ८.२३७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/237_dhanuHshatam_parIhAro.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Around the village there should be a pasture-ground, four hundred ‘bows’ or three ‘stick-throws’ (in width); but three times that space around the town.—(237)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

चतुर्हस्तं **धनुस्** तेषां **शतम्** । चत्वारि हस्तशतानि । **समन्ततश्** चतसृषु दिक्षु । **ग्रामस्य परीहारः** कर्तव्यः । अनुप्तसस्या भूमिः पशूनां सुखप्रचारार्था कर्तव्या । **शम्या**[^१०६] दण्डयष्टिः, सा बाहुवेगेन प्रेरिता यत्र पतति ततः प्रदेशाद् उद्धृत्य पुनः पातयितव्या यावत् त्रिस् तस्य परिमाणो वा **शम्यापातः** परिहारः । **त्रिगुणो नगरस्य** । ग्रामनगरे प्रसिद्धे । **शम्यायाः पाताः** प्रेरिताया वेगसंस्कारक्षयो भूमौ स्थानादि ॥ ८.२३७ ॥


[^१०६]:
     M G omit: śamyā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

the ‘bow’ is four cubits in length; four hundred such ‘bows.’

‘*Around*’— on the four sides, ‘*of the village*,’—the
‘*pasture-ground*’ shall he reserved; that is, this much of space should
be left uncultivated, for the roaming about of cattle.

‘*Śamyā*’ is a stick; this should be thrown with great force; and from
the point where it falls, it should be thrown again; and when this has
been done three times, that shall represent the size of the
pasture-ground.

‘*Three times that around the town*’;—the distinction between ‘village’
and ‘town’ is well known.

‘*Stick-throws*’—*i.e*., its being thrown, falling on the ground on the
momentum being spent up, and so forth.—(237)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 774), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Śaṃyā*’ is the piece of wood which serves as the bolt keeping
the bullock fixed to the yoke,—and the distance covered by the tin-owing
of tins piece of wood is what is called ‘*Śamyāpāta*.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 231), which, reading
‘*Saṃyāpātāḥ*’ (in place of ‘*Śaṃyāpātāḥ*’) notes that the ‘*Sami*’ is a
wooden bolt, and three times the distance covered by the throwing of it
should be the extent of the pasture-land round the village, and three
times this should be the pasture-land surrounding a city.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 96), which explains ‘*parīhāra*’
as ‘land reserved for the grazing of cattle—and in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 817).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.166-167).—‘In accordance with the wishes of the
village-people, and in consonance with the extent of land available and
the orders of the King, pasture-land for the grazing of cows shall he
reserved...... This pasture-land shall he one hundred bow-lengths in
extent, and shall he beyond the village and the cultivated holds; it
shall he two hundred how-lengths round a market-town, and four hundred
bow-lengths round a city.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यो देशो ग्रामनगरयोः समन्ततो गवां सुखप्रचारस्थानासनार्थम् अनुप्तसस्यकार्यः ॥ ८.२३६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

237	On all sides of a village a space, one hundred dhanus or three samya-throws (in breadth), shall be reserved (for pasture), and thrice (that space) round a town.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/238_tatrA-parivRtan_dhAnyam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>238 तत्राऽपरिवृतन् धान्यम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

तत्राऽपरिवृतं धान्यं  
विहिंस्युः पशवो यदि ।  
न तत्र प्रणयेद् दण्डं  
नृपतिः पशुरक्षिणाम्  ॥ ८.२३८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/238_tatrA-parivRtan_dhAnyam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the cattle damage the unfenced crops therein, the king, in that case, shall not inflict punishment on the cattle-keepers.—(238)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**तत्र** परीहारस्थाने क्षेत्रं न कर्तव्यम् । अथ कृतं तस्माद् वृत्तिर् न कृता । अतः क्षेत्रिण एवापराध्यन्ति, न पशुपालाः । न हि पाल एकैकं पशुं हस्तबन्धेन नेतुं शक्नोति । न च पशूनाम् अन्यो निर्गमो ऽस्ति ॥ ८.२३८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

As a rule, no crops should be grown on the pasture-lands; since if they
have been grown,—why should fences have not been put up? The fault thus
lies with the cultivator, and not with the cattle-keepers. The
cattle-keeper cannot always be leading each individual animal by the
rope; and there is no other grazing ground for the cattle.—(238)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.162), to the effect that this
impurity pertains only to cases where the crops are not fenced.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.162).—‘If cattle graze in a field on the road-side, or
near the village pasture-land, there is no offence, if it goes there by
chance, and not intentionally on the part of the cowherd.’

*Nārada* (11.40).—‘When a field is situated on the borders of a village,
or contiguous to the pasture-land, or adjacent to a high road, the
herdsman is not reprehensible for any damage to the crops, if the field
is not protected by a fence.’

*Gautama* (12.21).—‘If damage is done in an unenclosed field near the
road, the responsibility falls on the herdsman and on the owner of the
field.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.147-148).—‘There is no offence if the damage has been done
near a highway, or near a village, or in a field adjacent to the
pasture-ground; or if it has been done in an unenclosed field.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यदि तु तत्र भूलोपात् समुप्यते न केनचित् परिवृतं च भवेत्, ततस् तद्भक्षणे गोभिर् न दोषः स्यात् पशुरक्षिणाम् ॥ ८.२३७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

238	If the cattle do damage to unfenced crops on that (common), the king shall in that case not punish the herdsmen.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/239_vRtin_tatra.md">
<details open><summary><h3>239 वृतिन् तत्र ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वृतिं तत्र प्रकुर्वीत  
याम् उष्ट्रो न विलोकयेत् ।  
छिद्रं च वारयेत् सर्वं  
श्व-सूकरमुखानुगम्  ॥ ८.२३९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/239_vRtin_tatra.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One should set up an enclosure there which the camel cannot see, and shut up every opening through which the head of a dog ok a boar could be thrust.—(239)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कण्टकशाखादीनां प्राकारविन्यासः[^१०७] पशुप्रवेशवारणार्थः क्षेत्रारामादीनां **वृतिर्** उच्यते । या क्वचित् पर्णिकेति प्रसिद्धा। वारणा **वृतिः**। तस्या उन्नतिर् इयती कर्तव्या ययोष्ट्रो नावलोकयति । 


[^१०७]:
     M G: prakāra-

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;किम् इयं द्वितीया तृतीयार्थे **याम् उष्ट्र** इति । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;नेति ब्रूमः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कथं तर्हि वृतिम् उष्ट्रो न पश्यति । 

<u>महोत्सेधाया</u> द्वितीयपार्श्वस्यादर्शनाद् अदृष्टैव वृतिः ।   
**छिद्रं च** विवरम् **वारयेत्**[^१०८] **सर्वम्** । **श्वसूकरमुखेन** यद् अनुगम्यते तन् मुखपरिमाणम्[^१०९] । तथा कुर्याद् यथा श्वसुखं न माति । तन्मुखाद् अप्य् अल्पछिद्रम् इत्य् अर्थः ॥ ८.२३९ ॥



[^१०९]:
     M G: mukhaṃ parimāṇaṃ


[^१०८]:
     M G DK: āvārayet

_तथा कृतायां वृतौ ।_
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Enclosure*’—is the name given to a fencing of thorns and twigs that is
put up round fields and gardens for the preventing of the entrance of
cattle; in some places this is called ‘*parṇikā*.’

The height of this enclosure should be such that the camel shall not
look over it.

“Is the accusative ending in ‘*yām*,’ ‘*which*,’ used in the sense of
the Instrumental?” Our answer is—*no*.

“How then would be the camel not see the *enclosure*?”

If it is very high, its other side being not visible, the enclosure is
as good as *not seen*.

All the openings should also he closed,—such openings as can he entered
by the head of the dog or the hog; *i.e*, the gaps that may be of the
size of the head of these animals: the sense is that every effort should
be made so that their head may not be thrust in.—(239)

After the enclosure has been set up—
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.162) as laying down the necessity
of fencing fields and gardens; and *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the following
notes:—‘*Tatra*’, round the field,—the fence should be so high that even
a tall animal like the camel should not be able to see the crops from
the other side;—‘*mukhānugam*’, enabling the mouth of the dog or the hog
lo reach the crops,—‘*mukhonantam*’ is another reading;—the meaning is
as “follows:—One should build a fence, like a wall, round the field,
which should be so high that the camel may not be able to see the crops;
and if there are any holes there, large enough to enable the dog or the
hog to thrust its mouth into it, then all these should be securely
closed up: If we read ‘*vā vārayet*’, then the second half is to be
taken as laying down another method of having the fence.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (11.41).—‘On that side of the field which faces the road, a
fence shall ho made, over which a camel cannot look, nor horses or
cattle jump, and which a hoar cannot break through.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 233).—‘Round a field situated on
the road-side, an enclosure should he erected which the camel may not
look over, nor may horses or boars be able to gain entrance.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पशुवारणसमर्थायाम् तु वृतौ कृतायां सस्योपघाते पालस्य दोषः स्यात् ॥ ८.२३८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

239	(The owner of the field) shall make there a hedge over which a camel cannot look, and stop every gap through which a dog or a boar can thrust his head.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/240_pathi_xetre.md">
<details open><summary><h3>240 पथि क्षेत्रे ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पथि क्षेत्रे परिवृते  
ग्रामान्तीये ऽथ वा पुनः ।  
स-पालः शतदण्डार्हो  
विपालान् वारयेत् पशून्  ॥ ८.२४० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/240_pathi_xetre.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If cattle attended by the keeper be found in an enclosed field, on the road-side or near the village, the keeper should be fined a hundred; but cattle without a keeper shall be driven off.—(240)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**परिवृते पथि क्षेत्रे** **ग्राम**समीपवर्तिनि च परीहारमध्यगते । **अन्त**शब्दः समीपवचनः । यदि भक्षयेत् पशुः **सपालश्** च स्यात्, संनिहिते पाले,[^११०] **पालः शतदण्डार्थः** पशोर् दण्डासंभवात् । पाले ऽसंनिहिते ऽपि गृहे यदा[^१११] । नाप्य् असौ[^११२] पालः प्रसिद्धो न पुनस् तत्प्रेषितो वारिको रूपकमात्रवेतनः[^११३] । **विपालाः पशवो वारयितव्या** दण्डादिना, न तु दण्डनीयाः । **विपालाश्** चोत्सृष्टवृषादयः । अन्येषां तु विपालानां स्वामिनो दण्डः । 


[^११३]:
     M G: rūpamātracetanaḥ


[^११२]:
     DK omits: nāpy asau


[^१११]:
     DK: gṛhādau kāryavyagratayā (this looks like a conjectural reading)


[^११०]:
     M G J omit: pāle; J: saṃnihitaḥ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अथ वा **अपरिवृते** इति प्रश्लेषः । क्षेत्रसंबन्धाच् च गम्यमानः क्षेत्रस्वामी सपाल इत्य् अन्यपदार्थतयाभिसंबध्यते "सहपालेन"[^११४] इति । 


[^११४]:
     M G: sahapāleti

क्षेत्रे को दण्ड्यः । उभौ दण्ड्यौ । पालः क्षेत्रिकश् च । क्षेत्रिकस् तावत् किल किम् इति पथि क्षेत्रे वृतिं न कृतवान् । पालेनापि वृतौ चास्त्यां किं क्षेत्रं खादयितव्यम् । विपालं[^११५] प्रमादाद् यूथच्युतं वारयेत् । तथा च गौतमः- "पथि क्षेत्रे ऽनावृते पालक्षेत्रिकयोः" (ग्ध् १२.२१) इति ॥ ८.२४० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*In an enclosed field, either on the road-side, or near the village*’—
within the pasture-ground;—the term ‘*anta*’ means *near*;—if the cattle
should eat the crops,—and the keeper be on the spot,—then he should ‘*be
fined* *a* *hundred*’, since no fine could be imposed upon the cattle;
so also when the keeper is close by, if he is too much engrossed in his
family-affairs, and does not send any hired person to see to the cattle.

‘*Cattle without a keeper*’ should he ‘*driven off*’ with a stick or
some such thing; and they shall not he punished. ‘*Cattle without a
keeper*’ that are meant here are such calves as have been sot free in
connection with certain religious rites. (These belong to no one). In
the case of other cattle roaming about without a keeper, punishment
shall he inflicted upon the owner.

Or, we may read ‘*aparivṛtā*,’ ‘*unenclosed*,’ ‘*unfenced*,’ *for*
‘*parivṛtā*,’ ‘*enclosed*,’ and ‘*sapāla*’ may be taken as standing for
‘*the owner along with the keeper*,’—the compound ‘*sapāla*’ meaning a
party other than the one denoted by the terms of the compound, *i.e.,
one along with the keeper*—and the question arising ‘who is to be
punished in this case?’—the answer is that both the owner of the field
and the keeper of the cattle should ho punished;—tho owner being
punished for the fault of having cultivated the field near the road-side
and not fencing it; if it had been fenced, how could the crops have been
eaten?

‘*Cattle without a keeper*’—which may have strayed from the herd—should
be driven off. Says Gautama (12.21)—‘When there is an unfenced field on
the road-side, punishment shall be inflicted on the keeper and on the
cultivator of the field.’—(240)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vārayet*’—Rāmacandra reads ‘*cārayet*’ and takes the whole verse as a
single sentence—‘If the cattle-keeper *takes the cattle to graze* in a
field that is fenced, he shall be fined along with his master.’

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 232), which reads
‘*cārayet*’ for ‘*vārayet* it explains the meaning of the verse to
be—‘The field on the road-side or on village precincts being duly
fenced, if its crops are eaten (this clause is to be added), then the
keeper of the cattle is to be fined one hundred (*paṇas*), and the stray
cattle is to he caught and tied up.’

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 266), which adds the
following notes:—When a field on the road-side has been duly fenced, if
cattle break through the fence and destroy the crops, the keeper of the
cattle is to be filled a hundred *paṇas*; similarly when a field on the
precincts of a village has been duly fenced, if cattle break into it and
eat the crops, the keeper is to be fined a hundred *paṇas*. This
indicates that there is to be no punishment if the field is unfenced.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 771), which explains the meaning to be
that when the field on the road-side and other such places has been duly
fenced, if it is damaged by cattle which is attended by their keeper,
then the keeper is to be fined one hundred; but if the cattle is
unattended it shall be driven off;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
137b), which explains ‘*pathi kṣetre*’ a s ‘in a field close by the
path,’—and ‘*grāmāntīye*’ as ‘lying on the outskirts of the village.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (11.28, 29, 35).—‘When crops have been destroyed by cows or
other cattle crossing a fence, the herdsman deserves punishment in that
case, unless he should have done his best to keep the cattle off. When
the crops have been entirely destroyed to the very roots, the owner of
them may claim a corresponding quantity of grain as damages; the
herdsman shall be corporally punished: and the owner of the cattle shall
pay a fine. When cows, straying through the fault of their keeper, have
entered a field, no punishment shall be inflicted on their owner; the
herdsman alone being punishable.’

*Gautama* (12.19-20).—‘If damage is done by cattle, the responsibility
lies on the owner; but if the cattle were attended by a herdsman, then
it falls on the latter.’

*Āpastamba* (2.28.5).—‘If cattle, leaving their stable, eat the crops of
other persons, then the owner of the crops, or the King’s servants, may
make them lean by impounding them; hut this punishment shall not he
over-done.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.140-146).—‘If a she-buffalo damages crops, her keeper shall
he fined eight *māṣas*; if she has been without a keeper, her owner
shall pay the fine. For mischief done by a horse or a camel, or an ass,
the fine shall he the same. For damage done by a cow, it shall he half;
half of that again in the case of the goat or the sheep. For cattle
abiding in the field after eating the crops, the fine shall he double;
and in every case the owner of the field shall receive the value of the
crops that have been destroyed.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.162).—‘In the case of a field on the roadside, or
adjacent to the pasture-land of the village, if cattle is allowed to
graze unintentionally, there is no offence; but if it is done
intentionally, the man deserves punishment like the thief.’

*Uśanas* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 232).—‘If a man asks for compensation for
the crops that may haves been grazed by a cow, his Pitṛs and deities do
not accept his offerings.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यष्टिपातेन खादयन् पालः शतदण्डार्हः स्यात्, **विपालं** च **पशुं वारयेत्** । अदण्डश् च स्यात् पशुपालः तदसंनिधानात् । अन्यस् त्व् अत्रार्थः सह पालेन **सपालः** क्षेत्रिकः न पशुर् अत्रोच्यते । पूर्ववच्छतदण्डार्हः स्यात् । उभयापराधात्, क्षेत्रिकेण तावत् किम् इति क्षेत्रं स्वम् अनावृतम् इति, तस्माद् उभयापराधाद् उभयोर् दण्डः । गौतमीये ऽपि चोक्तम् "पथि क्षेत्रे ऽनावृते पालक्षेत्रिकयोः" इति ॥ ८.२३९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

240	(If cattle do mischief) in an enclosed field near a highway or near a village, the herdsman shall be fined one hundred (panas); (but cattle), unattended by a herdsman, (the watchman in the field) shall drive away.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/241_xetreShv_anyeShu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>241 क्षेत्रेष्व् अन्येषु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

क्षेत्रेष्व् अन्येषु तु पशुः  
स-पादं पणम् अर्हति ।  
सर्वत्र तु सदो देयः  
क्षेत्रिकस्येति धारणा  ॥ ८.२४१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/241_xetreShv_anyeShu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of other fields, the cattle-keeper should be fined a ‘paṇa’ and a quarter; and in all cases the crop shall be made good to the owner of the field; such is the established rule.—(241)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पथिक्षेत्रग्रामान्तीयेभ्यो **ऽन्यानि क्षेत्राणि,** तद्भक्षणे **सपादपणो** दण्डः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु चात्र स्वल्पेन दण्डेन भवितव्यम्, दूरक्षेत्रात् संनिहिते क्षेत्रे । यत्[^११६] तु पन्थानम् अतिक्रम्य क्षेत्रं[^११७] बहिर्ग्रामं[^११८] वा,[^११९] तत्र महान् दण्डो युक्तः । किम् इति गवां पालो गन्तुं तत्र ददाति । 


[^११९]:
     M G DK: ca


[^११८]:
     M G: vāhigrāmaṃ; DK: bahirgrāmakaṃ


[^११७]:
     M G: kṣetriyaṃ


[^११६]:
     M G: yaṃ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;नैष दोषः । यद्य् अत्र महादण्डो नोच्येत तदा प्रत्यहं प्रवेशनिर्गमैर् गवां भक्षयन्तीनां ग्रामान्तरक्षेत्राण्य् उत्सीदेयुः । दण्डात् तु महतो बिभ्यतो यत्नेन रक्षन्ति । अन्यत्र गास्[^१२०] तृणविशेषार्थं[^१२१] कथंचिन् नयतः[^१२२] स्वल्पो दण्डः । 


[^१२२]:
     M G DK: nayati


[^१२१]:
     M G: -ārthā; DK: -ārthe


[^१२०]:
     M G: go

- अत्रापि विपालानां वारणम् एव । 

सर्वत्र क्षेत्रस्वामिनः सदफले देये[^१२३] । कुशलैः च ते[^१२४] परिमाणेन[^१२५] कल्पिते ।   

**क्षेत्रिकस्य**[^१२६] । क्षेत्रम् अस्यास्तीति, व्रीह्यादिताट्टक् । **इति धारणा**, एष निश्चय इत्य् अर्थः । **सर्वत्र**ग्रहणाच् च विपाले ऽपि पशौ क्षेत्रिकस्य सदलाभः[^१२७] । यद्य् अपि **पशु**शब्दः सामान्यशब्दो महिष्यजाव्युष्ट्रगर्दभादिषु वर्तते तथापि स्मृत्यन्तरदर्शनाद् गोष्व् अयं दण्ड इति मन्यते । तथा च गौतमः- "अश्वमहिष्योर् दश[^१२८], अजाविषु द्वौ" (ग्ध् १२.२४–२५) इत्याद्य् अन्यत्र कल्पना ॥ ८.२४१ ॥



[^१२८]:
     M G DK: daśamahiṣīṣv


[^१२७]:
     M G DK: gatalābhaḥ


[^१२६]:
     M G DK omit: kṣetrikasya

_अत्रापवाधः।_
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the case of ‘*other fields*’—*i.e*., other than those on the
road-side or near the village;—if the crops are eaten, the fine shall be
a ‘*paṇa and a quarter*.’

“The fine should be a small one, in the case of a field close by, as
compared to that in the cue of one that can be reached after traversing
a long distance, or which is situated outside the village. In the latter
case the punishment should be heavy. For in this case there can be no
excuse for the cattle being allowed to enter the field.”

There is no force in this; if a heavy fine were not inflicted in the
case of fields close by, then every day, when the cattle would be going
out or coming in, they would destroy all the fields near the village;
while if there is a heavy fine imposed, people would be afraid of it and
would take special care to keep them away. In the case of remoter
fields, it is only seldom that cattle are taken to graze so far for the
sake of some particular kind of grass; hence only a slight fine has been
prescribed in this case.

In the case of these fields also, cattle without a keeper should be
driven off.

In all cases the loss to the owner of the field has to be made good, the
exact amount being determined by experts.

‘*Kṣetrika*’ is *one who has possession of the field*; the word being
formed with the affix ‘*ṭhak*,’ the original term ‘*kṣetra*’ belonging
to the ‘*vrīhyādi*’ group.

‘*Such is the established rule*’—laid down on the subject.

The use of the phrase ‘*in all cases*’ indicates that in the case of
cattle without a creeper also, the loss has to be made good to the owner
of the field by the owner of the cattle.

Though the term ‘*cattle*,’ ‘*paśu*,’ includes all such animals as the
buffalo, the goat, the sheep, the camel, the ass and so forth,—yet, on
the strength of the words of another *Smṛti*, it is restricted to *cows*
only. Gautama (12.24-25) prescribes other fines in the case of animals
other than the cow—‘In the case of the horse and the buffalo, the fine
is to be ten, while in that of goats and sheep two each.’—(241)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 769), which adds the
following—‘The meaning of the verse is as follows:—With the exception of
those fields which have been specifically mentioned by Manu to be such
that for damaging their crops cattle are *not* to be punished;—if the
crops of any other fields happen to be damaged, then the keeper is to be
fined one *kārṣāpaṇa* and a quarter’;—this should be understood as
referring to repeated and serious damage:—‘and in all cases of damage to
crops by cattle, the estimated produce of the field damaged should be
given to the owner.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 234), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Anyeṣu*,’ in the case of fields other than those lying on the
outskirts of the village and so forth;—the ‘cattle’ (to be fined) should
here be taken as standing for the *keeper* of the cattle;—it being
impossible for the *cattle* to pay a fine; the fine should be understood
to be a *paṇa and a quarter* for each head of cattle;—and in
*Vīvādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 65), which explains ‘*anyeṣu*,’ as,
‘lying at a distance.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (12.21-26).—‘If the damage was done in an unenclosed field
near the road, the responsibility falls on the herdsman and on the owner
of the field. Five *māṣas* form the fine to be paid for damage done by a
cow; six for a camel or an ass; ten for a horse or a buffalo; two for
each goat or sheep. If the entire crop has been destroyed, the value of
the whole must be paid in addition to the fine.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 60).—‘In the case of camels and buffaloes running away
after grazing in the reserved pasture-land, one-fourth of a *Paṇa*
should be realised; for cows, horses and asses, one-eighth; in that of
small cattle, one-sixteenth. If they sit on the land after grazing, the
fines shall be double; if they abide on the land, it will be quadruple.
In the case of crops being grazed by cattle, the damage done shall be
computed and double the amount of the value shall be the amount of the
fine inflicted.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.159-160).—‘If crops are damaged by the she-buffalo,
there shall be a fine of eight *māṣas*; half of his, if by the cow; and
half of that again, if by goat or sheep; if they have sat in the field
after grazing, the fine shall be double.’

Do. (2.161).—‘The owner of the field shall receive the value of as much
crop as may have been damaged; the keeper of the cattle should be
beaten, and the owner should be punished with the aforesaid fine.’

*Nārada* (11.38-39).—‘When a man claims damages for crops grazed by
cattle, that quantity of grain should be restored to him by the owner of
the cattle which may have been consumed by the cattle in the estimation
of the neighbours the cows shall be given up to the owner and the grain
to the husbandman. In the same way a fine shall be imposed on the
herdsman when crops have been trodden down by cows.’

Do. (11.31).—‘For damage done by a cow, he shall inflict a fine of one
*māṣa*; two *māṣas* in the case of a she-buffalo; half a *māṣa* in the
case of a goat trespassing with its young.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 235).—‘The owner of the cow should be
made to pay a quarter *Paṇa*; of the she-buffalo, two quarters; of
goats, sheep and calves, one quarter is the fine ordained.’

*Śāṅkha-Likhīta* (Do.).—‘In the case of all calves, one *māṣa*; ten in
that of the she-buffalo; sixteen in that of asses and camels; and four,
in that of goats and sheep.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अन्यक्षेत्राणि पूर्वोक्ताद् अवधेर् यानि बहिः तान्य् उच्यन्ते । गोश् च सपादस्य पणस्योपदेशाद्, उपघातानुरूपेण महिष्यादीनां स्याद् राजभाव्यो दण्डः । **शदः क्षेत्रिकस्य** **सर्वत्र**शब्दाच् च विपाले ऽपि शदो देयत् इति ॥ ८.२४० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

241	(For damage) in other fields (each head of) cattle shall (pay a fine of one (pana) and a quarter, and in all (cases the value of) the crop (destroyed) shall be made good to the owner of the field; that is the settled rule.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/242_anirdashAhA~N_gAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>242 अनिर्दशाहाङ् गाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अनिर्दशाहां गां सूतां  
वृषान् देवपशूंस् तथा ।  
स-पालान् वा वि-पालान् वा  
न दण्ड्यान् मनुर् अब्रवीत्  ॥ ८.२४२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/242_anirdashAhA~N_gAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But Manu has declared that no punishment shall be inflicted upon a cow within ten days of its calving, or bulls or dedicated cattle,—whether with or without keepers.—(242)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**गो**ग्रहणान् महिष्यादिषु दोषः । **वृषाः** उक्षाणः[^१२९] । **देवपशवो** देवयागार्थं यजमानेन कल्पिताः प्रत्यासन्नयागाः । अथ वेष्टकादिकूटस्थापिता करिहरादीनां प्रतिकृतयो[^१३०] देवा उच्यन्ति । तेषां पशवः । तान् उद्दिश्य केनचिद् उत्सृष्टाः । तदा ह्य् अस्य देवानां पशूनां च स्वस्वामिसंबन्धस्य संभवात्, पुरुषस्वामिभावस्यासंभवात्[^१३१], देवायतनमण्डनानाम् चैष धर्मः । न तु तत्पालकैर् वाहदोहाद्यर्थं ये देवगृहेषु धार्यन्ते । यतः पालका एव तेषां देवानाम् अर्थं[^१३२] विनियुञ्जते । अतस् तत्र पालका एव स्वामिनः । अतो युक्तः स्वामिवताम् अन्येषां यो धर्मः स तत्र । आयतनमण्डनास् त्व् अपरिगृहीता[^१३३] अव्यवधानेन देवपशुशुद्धिम् उत्पादयन्ति । वृषोत्सर्गादिविधानोत्सृष्टा वृषाः कैश्चित् परिगृह्यन्ते । ततः **सपाला** अथ वापरिगृहीतास्[^१३४] ततो **विपालाः**, उभयेषाम् अदण्डः[^१३५] ॥ ८.२४२ ॥


[^१३५]:
     M G: ayaṃ daṇḍaḥ


[^१३४]:
     M G DK: cāparigṛhītās


[^१३३]:
     M G: -maṇḍanasthaḥ parigṛhītā


[^१३२]:
     DK: arthe


[^१३१]:
     J omits: puruṣasvāmibhāvasyāsaṃbhavāt; M G: puruṣasvāmisvāmibhāvasya saṃbhavāt


[^१३०]:
     M G: prakṛtayo


[^१२९]:
     M G: satkārair
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The present verse lays down an exception to what has been said above.

Since the text speaks of the ‘*cow*,’ it follows that, in the case of
other animals, such as the buffalo and the like, the wrong done is
cognisable. The term ‘*vṛṣāh*’ stands for *bulls*.

‘*Dedicated cattle*,’—such cattle as have been selected by a sacrificer
for being used at an impending sacrificial performance. Or the term
‘*deva*’ may stand for the images of Viṣṇu, Śiva or other Gods installed
within brick-structures; and such ‘cattle’ as may have been presented to
these ‘Gods’ would be called ‘*dedicated cattle*’; as in such cases
there would be a relation of possession and possessed between the ‘Gods’
and the ‘cattle.’

What is declared here pertains to such cattle as serve as ornaments of
temples; and not to those that are only brought there for the purpose of
their milk being offered to the temple. Because in the case of the
latter, it is the keepers that offer the milk to the Gods, and hence are
the ‘owners’ of the cattle; so that these have to be regarded as on the
same footing as other owners. On the other hand, those that serve as
ornaments to the temple have been presented to the temple, and as such
come to be regarded as being ‘dedicated cattle.’

Some people hold that the term ‘*vṛṣāh*’ stands for such bulls as have
been let off, in connection with the ceremony of *Vṛṣotsarga*.

Such cattle—whether they be ‘*with keepers*,’ or not belonging to any
one and hence ‘*without keepers*’—are not to be penalised.—(242)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara'* (p. 239), which explains
‘*deva-paśu*’ as ‘cattle dedicated to the gods’;—in *Aparārka* (p.
771);—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 268), which explains ‘*vṛṣa*’
as (*a*) ‘*mahokṣa*,’ *i*.*e*., ‘large bull,’ or (*b*) ‘bulls dedicated
by the rite called *vṛṣotsarga*’;—and in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 530), which
adds that the cattle mentioned here, if they do any damage, are simply
to be driven away;—and in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 811);—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta p. 68), which explains ‘*vṛṣān*’ as
‘breeding bulls.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.150).—‘If the damage has been done by bulls that have been
set at liberty, or by a cow shortly after her calving (there is no
offence).’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.163).—‘The Big Bull, cattle consecrated and let loose,
a cow newly calved, stray strange cattle, or those perturbed by
visitations of the King or of Fate,—these shall ho set at liberty
(without punishment), even though they he accompanied by the keeper (at
the time of grazing).’

*Uśanas* (Aparārka, p. 771).—‘Elephants and horses are not to he
punished; as also a strange cow, or one newly calved; or one that has
strayed from the herd, and all cows at the time of rejoicings or
Śrāddhas.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., p. 772).—‘In the matter of punishing the grazing of
cattle, of the highest, lowest and middlemost kinds, the King shall
inflict fines only in the event of the owner of the field complaining
about it.’

*Nārada* (11.30, 32, 33).—‘A cow within ten days of her calving, a big
bull, a horse and an elephant shall he kept off carefully. The owner of
any one of them is not liable to punishment for doing any damage. The
owners of elephants and horses shall not pay any fine. Impunity is
likewise granted to the owner of the strayed cow, of one that has
recently calved, or of one that is uncontrollable;—as also the owner of
one that has lost her way, or broken down, or stuck in the marsh, or a
bull marked by the sign of consecration.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 60).—‘The village-bull, the consecrated bull, the cow
within ten days of calving, old hulls and breeding bulls shall not be
punished.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पूर्वापवादः । वृषाः सेक्तारः प्रति तान् । देवपशवश् चोत्सृष्टा वृषोत्सर्गन्यायेन, अन्ये च मृगा आप्य् अजादयो देवायतनमण्डना अदण्ड्याः । <u>ननु</u> च निष्परिग्रहत्वाद् देवपशुष्व् एतद् अयुक्तं, सपरिग्रहानुगमाद् एषां तद्वत्प्राप्तौ सत्याम् अपवादः । अथ वा दृष्टान्तार्थम् एव पशव उपादीयन्ते । यथा देवपशवो ऽदण्ड्याः, एवम् अनिर्दशाहा गौः सूता वृषाश् च सेक्तार इति परिग्रहवद् वा । देवायतनेष्व् एतद् दण्डं न युक्तम् । एवं च सति यो ऽन्येषां परिग्रहवतां दर्मः स एव तेषाम् अपि स्यात् । न चैतद् इष्टम् ॥ ८.२४१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

242	But Manu has declared that no fine shall be paid for (damage done by) a cow within ten days after her calving, by bulls and by cattle sacred to the gods, whether they are attended by a herdsman or not.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/243_xetriyasyA-tyaye_daNDo.md">
<details open><summary><h3>243 क्षेत्रियस्याऽत्यये दण्डो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

क्षेत्रियस्याऽत्यये दण्डो  
भागाद् दशगुणो भवेत् [मेधातिथिपाठः - क्षेत्रिकस्याऽत्यये] ।  
ततो ऽर्धदण्डो भृत्यानाम्  
अज्ञानात् क्षेत्रिकस्य तु  ॥ ८.२४३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/243_xetriyasyA-tyaye_daNDo.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When there is transgression on the part of the farmer himself, his fine shall be ten times the royal share,—half of that in the case of servants, if it is unknown to the farmer.—(243)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

क्षेत्रस्वामिनः स्वक्षेत्रे **ऽत्ययो** ऽतिक्रमो ऽपराधो यदि भवेत् स्वकृतः[^१३६] — अकाले वापनम्, निदाघे अयोग्यबीजवापः, स्वपशुभिर् भक्षणम्, गृहे[^१३७] वाविदितफलप्रवेश[^१३८] इत्यादि — तदा राज्ञो यावान् भाग आगच्छति तं दशगुणं दण्डनीयः । अथ तस्याज्ञातम् एतत् प्रयुक्तैर् भृत्यैः क्षेत्रजागर्यानियुक्तैर् वा अपराद्धम्, तदा अर्धदण्दो भृत्यानाम् अत्यये क्षेत्रिकस्य दण्ड इति संबन्धः । क्षेत्रप्रसङ्गाद् अत्रेदम् उक्तम् ॥ ८.२४३ ॥


[^१३८]:
     M G J: vāviditaphalake prāyaśa


[^१३७]:
     M G J: giraṇaṃ


[^१३६]:
     M G J: svakṛte
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If there has been some ‘*transgression*’—fault—on the part of the farmer
himself, in connection with In’s farm,—such as untimely sowing, sowing
of unripe seed, damage to the crops by his own cattle, harvesting before
ripening, and so forth,—then the man should be fined ten times the
amount of the king’s share.

If without the farmer’s knowledge, the wrong has been done by the
servants employed by him—in the shape of night-watchers and others,—then
these servants shall be fined half the aforesaid amount.

The construction is—‘*atyaye kṣetriyasya daṇḍaḥ*.’

This has been set forth here in the present context, because it deals
with cultivated fields.—(243)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba* (2.28.1).—‘If a person who has taken up a plot of land for
cultivation does not exert himself and hence the land bears no crop, he
shall, if he is rich, be made to pay to the owner of the land the value
of the crops that ought to have been grown.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यस्मात् सस्यात् क्षेत्रिको यद् अपहरेत् तस्य भागकल्पनया दशगुणो दण्डः प्रकल्प्यः । **अर्धदण्डा** भृत्याः स्युः । **अज्ञानात् क्षेत्रिकस्य तु** प्रयोगाद् एव भृत्यानाम् असाव् एव दण्डः स्यात् । सस्यसम्बन्धप्रसङ्गाच् चायं क्षेत्रिकस्य व्यतिक्रम उच्यते, अस्तेयाभिमतत्वाच् च ॥ ८.२४२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

243	If (the crops are destroyed by) the husbandman's (own) fault, the fine shall amount to ten times as much as (the king's) share; but the fine (shall be) only half that amount if (the fault lay) with the servants and the farmer had no knowledge of it.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/244_etad_vidhAnam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>244 एतद् विधानम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एतद् विधानम् आतिष्ठेद्  
धार्मिकः पृथिवीपतिः ।  
स्वामिनां च पशूनां च  
पालानां च व्यतिक्रमे  ॥ ८.२४४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/244_etad_vidhAnam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

This is the rule that the righteous king shall observe, in the case of transgressions by owners, by cattle and by the keepers.—(244)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सुबोधो ऽयं श्लोकः ॥ ८.२४४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse is easily intelligible.—(244)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 176);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 139a).
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उपसंहाराथः श्लोकः ॥ ८.२४३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

244	To these rules a righteous king shall keep in (all cases of) transgressions by masters, their cattle, and herdsmen.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/245_sImAm_prati.md">
<details open><summary><h3>245 सीमाम् प्रति ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सीमां प्रति समुत्पन्ने  
विवादे ग्रामयोर् द्वयोः ।  
ज्येष्ठे मासि नयेत् सीमां  
सु-प्रकाशेषु सेतुषु  ॥ ८.२४५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/245_sImAm_prati.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When a dispute regarding boundaries arises between two villages, the king shall settle the boundary during the month of Jyeṣṭha, when the landmarks are distinctly perceptible.—(245)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सीमां प्रति विवादे** सीमानिमित्ते । लक्षणेत्थंभूतेति प्रतेः कर्मप्रवचनीयत्वात् द्वितीयानिमित्तम् अपि लक्षणम् इति शक्यते वक्तुम् । **सीमा** मर्यादा ग्रामादीनां विभागः परिमाणम् इयत्ता परिच्छेदनम् इति यावत् । **ज्येष्ठे मासि नयेन्** निर्णयः कर्तव्यः । मासविशेषनिर्णये[^१३९] हेतुम् आह **संप्रकाशेषु सेतुषु** । सेतवः सीमालिङ्गानि वक्ष्यमाणानि लोष्ठपाषाणादिविशिष्टजातीयसीमा[^१४०] ग्राह्या, तृणगुञ्जादीनि[^१४१] प्राग् अस्मात् कालाद् उत्थितेषु[^१४२] तृणेषु लोष्ठपाषाणयोर् अन्यस्याश् च भूमेर् न विशेषो लक्ष्यते । पाषाणलक्षितायां यदा तत्र तृणानि न ज्ञायन्ते तदा सा सीमेति निश्चीयते । एवं वल्लीस्थानादिष्व् अपि । प्राग् वसन्ताद् वासन्तिके दाहे विशेषो न लक्ष्यते । हेत्वभिधानाच् च यस्मिन् देशे यदा व्यज्यन्ते ततो मासात् कालहरणं कर्तुं न देयम्[^१४३] । अन्यदा तु लिङ्गज्ञानार्थं[^१४४] कालापेक्षापि भवतीत्य् एतावत्फलं **ज्येष्ठ**ग्रहणे ॥ ८.२४५ ॥


[^१४४]:
     M G: liṅgājñānārthaṃ


[^१४३]:
     M G J: nādeyam


[^१४२]:
     M G J: anutthiteṣu


[^१४१]:
     M G: tṛṇaṃjādīni; J: -sīmāgrāhyatṛṇa-


[^१४०]:
     M G: -viśeṣajātīya-


[^१३९]:
     DK (1: 933: māsaviśeṣeṇa nirṇayakaraṇe
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Dispute regarding boundaries*,’—*i.e*., dispute on account of
boundary: the particle ‘*prati*’ being a preposition, governs the
accusative, according to Pāṇini 1.4.90: specially as the cause of a
thing also can he spoken of as its characteristic feature.

‘*Boundary*’,—the limit of villages, their division, the exact
determination of their extent.

‘*Shall settle it*’—decide it,—‘*during the month of Jyeṣṭha*.’

The text adds the reason why the boundary should be settled during this
particular month:—‘*when the land-marks are distinctly perceptible*’—
Boundary-marks are going to be described below; such as those consisting
of clods of stone or things of that kind, and also thickets of grass and
the like. Before the advent of the said month, while grass is growing on
all sides, no difference could be perceived between grounds marked by a
stone-piece and other grounds. When however, the boundary is marked by a
piece of stone, if no grasses are visible, then the boundary is easily
determined. Similarly In cases where demarcation has been done by
creepers and thickets, the boundary should be settled before the advent
of spring; for when trees and creepers are burnt down by forest-fires
during the spring, no distinction could be perceived.

In as much as the text has put forward a reason for settling the dispute
during a certain month, it is to be concluded that in a case where the
marks are easily perceptible, the king should not wait for any
particular month, thereby affording time to the parties concerned. It is
only for the purpose of finding the necessary marks that one need wait
for any particular month. This is the sole purpose served by the mention
of the month of *Jyeṣṭha*.—(245)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 201), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Nayet*’, ‘should find out’;—‘*setu*’ here stands for
any mark of boundary,—where these are ‘*saprakāśa*,’ *i*. *e*., quite
perceptible by reason of water having dried up;—the word ‘*Jyaiṣṭha*’
also should be taken as standing for any time which makes it possible
for the boundary-marks to be perceived.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 758), which adds the following notes:—The
term ‘*grāma*’ should be taken including cities, fields and houses in
regard to which boundary-disputes arise, so that boundary-disputes fall
into these four classes;—when the text mentions the month of
‘*Jyeṣṭha*’, it does not mean that it must be done during that month;
all that it means to imply is *convenience*, that month being the most
convenient for the purpose of determining boundaries;—‘*setu*’ stands
for bunds and other boundary-marks;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 92);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 142a), which says that the month of,
‘*Jyeṣṭha*’ is mentioned only by way of illustration; all that is meant
is that it shall be done at a time when the boundary-marks may be
perceptible,—and that ‘*grāma*’ stands for *city* also.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.245-251)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.151).—‘They should determine the boundary as indicated
by a mound, coal, chaff or trees; as also by dikes, ant-hills, pits,
bones, stone-piles and such other things.’

*Nārada* (11.4-5).—‘They shall determine the boundary in accordance with
old landmarks, chaff of grain, coal, potsherds, wells, sanctuaries,
trees,—objects of general notoriety, such as ant-hills, artificial
mounds, slopes, hills and the like, fields, gardens, roads and old
dikes.’

*Bṛhaspati* (19.2-6).—‘The determination of boundaries should be settled
at the time of foundation, and it should be marked by visible and
invisible signs, so as to dispel all doubt. Wells, tanks, pools, large
trees, gardens, temples, mounds, channels, the course of a river, sands,
shrubs, or piles of stones;—by such visible signs as these a boundary
line should always be marked; also by other marks deposited underground,
which the earth is not likely to destroy;—such as dry cowdung, bones,
chaff, charcoal, stones, potsherds, sand, bricks, cow’s tails,
cotton-seeds and ashes; after having placed these substances in vessels
one should deposit them there underground at the extremities of the
boundary.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उपन्यासश् चित्तप्रणिधानार्थः । **ज्येष्ठमासे** सेतवः, सीमाव्यवच्छेदहेतवः, सुविज्ञाता भवन्ति ॥ ८.२४४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

245	If a dispute has arisen between two villages concerning a boundary, the king shall settle the limits in the month of Gyaishtha, when the landmarks are most distinctly visible.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/246_sIMAvRxAMsh_cha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>246 सींआवृक्षांश् च ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सींआवृक्षांश् च कुर्वीत  
न्यग्रोधाश्वत्थ-किंशुकान् ।  
शाल्मलीन् सालतालांश् च  
क्षीरिणश् चैव पादपान्  ॥ ८.२४६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/246_sIMAvRxAMsh_cha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall plant boundary-trees,—such as the Nyagrodha, the Aśvattha, the Kiṃśuka, the Śālmalī, the Sāla and the Tāla,—as also plants with milky juice.—(246)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**पादपा** वृक्षाः । **क्षीरिणो** ऽर्कोदुम्बरप्रभृतयः । एते च[^१४५] चिरस्थायित्वात् सीमादेश एव रोपयितव्या न ग्राममध्ये । सीमादेशाद् अन्यत्र क्रियमाणा न निश्चायकाः स्युः ॥ ८.२४६ ॥


[^१४५]:
     M G: evaṃ hi
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Pādapa*’ is *plant*.—‘*Plants with milky-juice*’—such as the *Arka*,
the *Udumbara* and the like.

These trees are long-lived; hence they should he planted on boundaries;
but never in the midst of the village. If they were planted elsewhere
also, they could not he sure indicatives of boundaries.—(246)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.151) as describing *visible*
boundaries;—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 202);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 270);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 73);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 139b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.245-251)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.245].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

246	Let him mark the boundaries (by) trees, (e.g.) Nyagrodhas, Asvatthas, Kimsukas, cotton-trees, Salas, Palmyra palms, and trees with milky juice,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/247_gulmAn_veNUMsh.md">
<details open><summary><h3>247 गुल्मान् वेणूंश् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

गुल्मान् वेणूंश् च विविधान्  
शमी-वल्ली-स्थलानि च ।  
शरान् कुब्जकगुल्मांश् च  
तथा सीमा न नश्यति  ॥ ८.२४७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/247_gulmAn_veNUMsh.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Also thickets, bamboos of various kinds, the Śamī-tree, creepers and mounds, reeds and Kubjaka thickets; trees shall not be obliterated.—(247)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Thickets*’—shrubs growing together in a compact form.

‘*Bamboos*’—*i.e*., such trees as the *Casta Fistula* and the like; as
there are many varieties of these, the text has added the epithet ‘*of
various kinds*.’

‘*Creepers*’—tendrils; those species of grass that have long-extending
roots.

‘*Mound*’—is an artificial raised grass-plot.

The *Kubjaka* being a ‘*thicket*’ (already mentioned before), it has
been specially singled out, on account of its importance.—(247)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 202), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Gulmāḥ*’, branchless shrubs,—‘*vallyaḥ*’; the
*guḍūcī* and other creepers,—‘*sthalāni*’, artificial
earth-mounds,—‘*kubjaka gulma*’, bushes of *kubjaka* (Rose).

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.151), whereon *Bālambhaṭṭī* has the
following notes:—‘*Gulma*’ is shrub without branches, or merely
grass-clump,—‘*sthala*’ is artificially elevated
ground,—‘*daṇḍakagulma*’ (which is one reading for ‘*kubjakagulma*’) is
not the right reading, the correct one being ‘*kupyakagulma*’, which
means ‘such shrubs as are related to (used in the cleaning and polishing
of) copper and other metals (except gold and silver)’;—‘*tathā*’,
*i.e*., ‘on this being done’;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 93).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.245-251)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.245].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

247	By clustering shrubs, bamboos of different kinds, Samis, creepers and raised mounds, reeds, thickets of Kubgaka; thus the boundary will not be forgotten.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/248_taDAgAny_udapAnAni.md">
<details open><summary><h3>248 तडागान्य् उदपानानि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

तडागान्य् उदपानानि  
वाप्यः प्रस्रवणानि च ।  
सीमासंधिषु कार्याणि  
देवतायतनानि च  ॥ ८.२४८॥ [म्२५०च्]
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/248_taDAgAny_udapAnAni.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Tanks, water-reservoirs, ponds and fountains should be built on boundary-links; as also temples.—(248)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

महांभांसि **तडागानि** । **वाप्यः** पुषकरिण्यः । **उदपानानि** कूपप्रभृतीनि । **प्रस्रवणान्य्** उदकस्यन्दा ईषत्स्रवदुदका भूप्रदेशाः । **देवतायतनानि** यक्षगृहादीनि । एतानि प्रकाशकानि । न ह्य् एतानि स्वल्पेनायासेन नाशयितुं शक्यन्ते । नाश्यमानेषु च महान् प्रत्यवायो भवति । सर्वस्य चोदकार्थिनो देवतादर्शनार्थिनश् च तत्र संनिधानात् सुज्ञातश् च साक्षिणां सीमासंधिर् भवति ॥ ८.२५० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Tanks*’—large reservoirs of water.

‘*Ponds*’—pools.

‘*Water-reservoir*’—wells and the like.

‘*Fountains*’— plots of ground from which small quantities of water
trickle out.

‘*Temples*’—houses for the worshipping of *Yakṣas* and other demi-gods.

All these are such marks as are publicly visible; and cannot be easily
obliterated; specially as the destroying of these entails a great sin;
and further, since all men desiring to fetch water, and to visit the
deity in the temple, are constantly on the spot, the boundary-line
becomes well known to witnesses.—(248)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 202), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Taḍāga*’, large water-reservoirs,—‘*vāpī*’, smaller
tanks,—‘*udapāna*’ wells,—‘*prasravaṇa*’, water-streams other than
rivers.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.151), where *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the
following notes:—‘*Udapāna*’, well,—‘*vāpī*’, long ponds with
stone-walls,—‘*prasravaṇa*’, springs and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 93).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.245-251)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.245].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

248	Tanks, wells, cisterns, and fountains should be built where boundaries meet, as well as temples,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/249_upaChannAni_chAnyAni.md">
<details open><summary><h3>249 उपछन्नानि चान्यानि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

उपछन्नानि चान्यानि  
सीमालिङ्गानि कारयेत् ।  
सीमाज्ञाने नृणां वीक्ष्य  
नित्यं लोके विपर्ययम्  ॥ ८.२४९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/249_upaChannAni_chAnyAni.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall also set up hidden boundary-marks,—seeing that in the world there are constant trespasses, due to the ignorance of boundaries among men.—(249)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Other hidden marks*’—such as dry cowdung and the like. These the king
shall set up when he is planning out new villages.

In this manner, the boundary is never obliterated; otherwise outward
marks might become obliterated by some cultivator ploughing the
plot.—(249)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.151), where *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds
the following notes ‘*Upacchannāni*,’ almost hidden,—‘*nityam*’, at all
times,—‘*viparyayam*’, mistake,—this indicates the reasons for
establishing other boundary marks.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 203), which explains
‘*Upacchannāni*’ as *hidden*,—and ‘*anyāni*’ as standing for ‘stones’
and other things mentioned in the following verses;—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 93).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.245-251)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.245].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

249	And as he will see that through men's ignorance of the boundaries trespasses constantly occur in the world, let him cause to be made other hidden marks for boundaries,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/250_ashmano.asthIni.md">
<details open><summary><h3>250 अश्मनो ऽस्थीनि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अश्मनो ऽस्थीनि गोवालांस्  
तुषान् भस्म कपालिकाः ।  
करीषम् इष्टकाङ्गारांश्  
शर्करा वालुकास् तथा  ॥ ८.२५०॥ [म्२४८]
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/250_ashmano.asthIni.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

As also, stones, bones, cow’s hair, chaff, ashes, potsherds, dry cow dung, bricks, cinders, pebbles, and sand.—(250)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

संहतप्रकाण्डा वीरुधो **गुल्मानि** । **वेणव** आरग्वधादयः । बहुत्वाच् च **विविध**ग्रहणम् । **वल्ल्यो** व्रततयः दीर्घाङ्कुरास् तृणजातयः । **स्थलानि**[^१४६] कृत्रिमा सशाड्वलादिपिण्डिकाः । **कुब्जकस्य** गुल्मत्वात् पृथग् उपदेश आदरार्थः । **करीषं** शुष्कं गोमयम् । **अङ्गारा** अग्निदग्धाः काष्टावयवाः । पाषाणकठिना[^१४७] मृदः **शर्कराः** । **कपालिका** शलशैकदेशः[^१४८] । अन्यानि **उपच्छन्नानि**[^१४९] कारयेद् राजा नवग्रामसंनिवेशे कृते निर्णयार्थम्[^१५०] । एवं सीमा न कदाचिन् नश्यति । अन्यथा तं प्रदेशं कश्चित् कर्षणेन नाशयेत्[^१५१] ॥ ८.२४७–४९


[^१५१]:
The commentary on these three verses is quite different in the three editions. I have followed Jha.


[^१५०]:
J: nirṇayam


[^१४९]:
DK: pracchannāni


[^१४८]:
M G: śakalaikadeśaḥ


[^१४७]:
DK (1: 935): pāṣāṇāḥ kaṭhinā


[^१४६]:
M G omit: sthalāni; DK: sthalā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Karīṣa*’—dry cowdung.

‘*Cinders*’—pieces of wood half-burnt.

‘*Stones*’ and ‘*pebbles*’—hardened pieces of clay. ‘*Potsherds*’—pieces
of broken jars.—(250)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 203), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Kāpālikā*’ is *karparā*, tiles,—‘*aṅgāra*’,
extinguished cinders, known as ‘*kokila*,’ *coal*,—‘*śarkarā*’ is small
pieces of broken earthenware.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.151);—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 93).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.245-251)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.245].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

250	Stones, bones, cow's hair, chaff, ashes, potsherds, dry cowdung, bricks, cinders, pebbles, and sand,
</details>
</details>
</div>

## 251-300
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/251_yAni_chaivamprakArANi.md">
<details open><summary><h3>251 यानि चैवम्प्रकाराणि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यानि चैवंप्रकाराणि  
कालाद् भूमिर् न भक्षयेत् ।  
तानि संधिषु सीमायाम्  
अप्रकाशानि कारयेत् [मेधातिथिपाठः - सीमाया]  ॥ ८.२५१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/251_yAni_chaivamprakArANi.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Other such-like things which the earth may not eat up in time,—these he shall secretly set up on junctions of boundaries.—(251)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

गुल्मादीनाम् उपदेशः प्रदर्शनर्थो न परिसंख्यार्थः । **एवंप्रकारानि**[^१५२] खदिरसारकालाञ्जनाद्यानि शर्करादितुल्यानि । का एवंप्रकारता । अत आह **कालाद् भूमिर् न भक्षयेत्** । भूमेर् भक्षणम् उपमया स्वरूपोपादानम् । यथा भक्षितं भेदेन नोपलभ्यन्ते तद्वद् भूमिसादापन्नम् इव तादृशं कुर्यात् ॥ ८.२५१ ॥


[^१५२]:
     M G DK omit: evaṃprakārāni
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ‘*thicket*’ and other things have been mentioned only by way of
illustration; and not for the purpose of excluding other things; since
such trees as the *Khadira*, the *Sāra*, the *Kālāñjana* and so
forth,—as also things similar to the ‘*pebble*’—are also used.

The text adds what is meant by ‘*such-like*’—‘*which* *the earth may not
eat up in time*.’ ‘*Eating-up*’ is used figuratively, for *corroding*.
Just as what has been *eaten up* cannot be differentiated from other
things, so also what has become obliterated by the corrosion of the
earth.—(251)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“According to Kullūka, who relies on a passage of Bṛhaspati, these
objects are to be placed in jars.” (Buhler.)

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2-151), whereon *Bālambhaṭṭī* has
the following notes:—‘*Yāni*’ other things similar to those just
mentioned,—‘*sīmāyām*’, on the boundary that has got to be
marked,—‘*sandhi*’, meeting point of the boundaries.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 203), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Evamprakārāṇi*,’ such as pebbles and so forth;—and in
‘*Vivādacintāmaṇi*’ (p. 93).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.245-251)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.245].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

षट् च्छ्लोकाः सीमासेतुप्रकारदर्शनार्थाः ॥ ८.२४५–२५० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

251	And whatever other things of a similar kind the earth does not corrode even after a long time, those he should cause to be buried where one boundary joins (the other).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/252_etair_lingair.md">
<details open><summary><h3>252 एतैर् लिङ्गैर् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एतैर् लिङ्गैर् नयेत् सीमां  
राजा विवदमानयोः ।  
पूर्वभुक्त्या च सततम्  
उदकस्यागमेन च  ॥ ८.२५२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/252_etair_lingair.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

By these signs shall the king determine the boundary between two contending parties; as also by long-continued possession and by flowing streams of water.—(252)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उभयोर् ग्रामयोः शून्यत्वे **लिङ्गैर्** निर्णेयः । वसतोः[^१५३] **पूर्वभुक्त्या** **सततम्** अविच्छन्नयास्मर्यमानावधिकया, न हि त्रिपुरुषभोगेन । स ह्य् अत्र प्रतिषिद्धप्रामाण्यः "आधिः सीमा" (म्ध् ८.१४९) इति अत्र, संभवति हि तत्रोपेक्षा बहुसाधारण्यात् सीमायाः । ये[^१५४] तु तत्र सीमशब्दं न[^१५५] पठन्ति तेषां भुक्तेः सिद्धम् एव प्रामाण्यम् । लिङ्गानां प्रामाण्यस्योक्तत्वात् प्रमाणान्तरनिवृत्तिर् आशङ्क्येतेति पुनर् उच्यते । 


[^१५५]:
     M G DK omit: na


[^१५४]:
     M G: yat


[^१५३]:
     M G: vasataḥ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;को ऽयम् **उदकागमः** प्रामाण्येनोच्यते । 

<u>यथान्यानि</u> लिङ्गानि नवसंनिवेशे क्रियन्ते तद्वद् एवोदकप्रवाहो ऽपि कर्तव्यः । अथ वा ययोर् ग्रामयोः प्रदेशान्तरे स एवोदकागमो विभागहेतुः प्रदेशान्तरे च विप्रतिपत्तिस् तत्र स एव प्रमाणम् । अथ वा महाग्रामविषयम् एतत् । नद्या अपर एको वा वार एकग्रमस् तत्र न पारवारिणो वक्तव्यम् "अस्मदीया भूमिर् अत्रापि विद्यते" इति । यदि वा कुतश्चिद् ग्रामात् तादृशेन प्रवाहेणावच्छिन्नापि काचिद् भूस् तथापि स एव विभागहेतुः स्वल्पे ऽपहारे[^१५६] ॥ ८.२५२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When there is a dispute between two persons, inhabitants of two
villages, the boundary is ascertained by means of the above-mentioned
marks.

‘*Long-continued possession*’;—*i.e*, possession whose beginning cannot
be traced, and not only ‘possession’ for *three generations*; the
validity of the latter having been rejected above, Under verse 119; and
also because the boundary of a village being public property, it is
quite possible for encroachments being ignored for three generations.
Some people read verse 149 without the mention of ‘boundary’; according
to these, the validity of ‘possession’ as a proof is established in all
eases; and yet it has had to be reiterated here, because, in view of the
enumeration of the proofs of boundary, it might he thought that
‘possession’ is not a proof at all.

“What is the *stream of water* that is mentioned as an indication of the
boundary?”

Just as in the case of new settlements, other various boundary-marks are
set up, in the same manner, a flowing water-canal also should be built.

Or, the meaning may be that when a stream of water divides two villages,
if, in one part of the village; that stream of water is found to be
recognised, as the boundary, and there is dispute in another part,—in
this case, the stream should be accepted as the indicative of the true
boundary in the latter case also. Or, this may be taken as referring to
a very large village; the sense being that when a village is located on
one side of a river, it cannot he open to any inhabitant of the other
bank to assert that he has his lands in the village on the

opposite side also. Or, the meaning may be that even when a certain part
of a village has been cut off by a running stream, that same stream
shall continue to serve as the boundary between the two
villages,—provided that the portion cut off is a small one.—(252)

VERSE CCLIII

If, even on the inspection of the marks, there should be a doubt, the
settlement of the dispute regarding boundaries shall be entirely
dependent upon witnesses.—(253)

*Bhāṣya*.

“How can there be a doubt, when the marks are there?”

If some one were to come and secretly remove the hidden marks to another
place, this would give rise to uncertainty. And as for the open public
marks—in the shape of the *Nyagrodha* and other trees,—it is not that
these trees are to be found on boundaries only; as a matter of fact,
they grow in other places also. It is for these reasons that the said
marks are not always reliable, and hence doubts are likely to arise.

In a case where there is no possibility of such invalidating
circumstances, the marks themselves are sufficient proof.

‘*Dependent upon witnesses*’—*i.e*., due to witnesses. The settlement,
ascertainment, is such as has the witnesses alone for its basis. The
meaning of the verse is that in cases where the marks are doubtful, or
where there are no marks at all, the dispute regarding boundaries can be
settled only by oral testimony.—(253).

VERSE CCLIV

Witnesses regarding boundaries shall be questioned in regard to the
boundary-marks, in the presence of an assembly of villagers and also of
the two contending parties.—(254)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2. 151), which adds the following
explanation:—‘By means of these marks, visible and invisible, as
indicated by his ministers and others, the king should determine the
boundary for those quarrelling over it.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 204), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Satatam upabhuktyā*’, by long unbroken possession—‘he should
determine’, ‘*nayet*’;—‘*udakasyāgamaḥ*’ is flowing current of water;—in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 93);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (110b);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 139b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (11.6, 11, 27).—‘When a piece of land has been carried off by a
stream, or abandoned by the owner, or when the boundry-marks have become
obliterated, they shall fix the boundary according to inferences drawn
from an inspection of the spot, and according to the traces of
possession. Should there be no persons conversant with the true state of
tilings, and no boundary-marks, then the King himself shall fix the
boundary between the two estates as he thinks host. A field which has
been held by three generations in succession, and a house which has been
inherited from an ancestor, cannot be estranged from its legitimate
owner by force of possession, except when the King wills it so.’

*Bṛhaspati* (19.14, 23, 24).—‘Those are witnesses in a suit of this kind
who know the title of acquisition, the size, the duration of possession,
the name and the characteristic features of the land in question. When
land is taken from a person enjoying it without legitimate title or
ownership, and given to a worthier person, the latter shall not he
deprived of it. A house, tank, shop or the like having been used by a
man since the time of its foundation, must not he taken away from him,
nor diminished or altered.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 205).—‘Possession is to be taken into
consideration in the matter of deciding boundary-disputes; but only
while there are witnesses deposing to the possession; and witnesses are
of two kinds—those named in documents and those not so named.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यत्र निबद्धानि लिङ्गा[नि नष्टानि] न चान्यतरस्य शून्यता स्मर्यते, तत्र पूर्वभुक्तिः प्रमाणम् । अन्यतरशून्यत्वे तु ऽन भोगेन प्रणश्यति" इति पूर्वभुक्तिर् नाश्रियते । विद्यते हि भोगस्य निमित्त[त्वम् यस्मात् अशून्ये ऽव]च्छेदः क्रियते । किम् अत्र लिङ्गकरणेन स्रोत एव हि नित्यम् अभिप्रवृत्तं सीमास्थापकं भविष्यति । न हि पूर्वभुक्तौ सत्याम् उदकागमो निर्हेतुको विकल्पेन वा बाध[को युक्तः कल्प]यितुम् । तस्माच् छून्यविषय एव सुखप्रतिपत्त्यर्थ आयत्युपेतयोर् उदकागमः कल्प्यते । अथ वा महास्रोतो [अशून्य]विषय एव द्रष्टव्यः । स्रोतांसि हि महान्ति कदाचित् [अपथेन] प्रवर्तन्ते, तत्र पूर्वभुक्तिम् अतीत्यापि स्रोत एव निर्णयाय स्याद् इति ॥ ८.२५१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

252	By these signs, by long continued possession, and by constantly flowing streams of water the king shall ascertain the boundary (of the land) of two disputing parties.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/253_yadi_sMshaya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>253 यदि स्ंशय ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यदि स्ंशय एव स्याल्  
लिङ्गानाम् अपि दर्शने ।  
साक्षिप्रत्यय एव स्यात्  
सीमावादविनिर्णयः [मेधातिथिपाठः - सीमावादविनिश्चयः]  ॥ ८.२५३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/253_yadi_sMshaya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If, even on the inspection of the marks, there should be a doubt, the settlement of the dispute regarding boundaries shall be entirely dependent upon witnesses.—(253)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कथं पुनर् लिङ्गेषु सत्सु संशयः । यानि तावत् प्रच्छन्नानि तानि यदि केनचित् कथंचिद् आगम्य प्रच्छन्नम् अन्यत्र नीयेरन् नैव निश्चयः स्यात् । ये ऽपि प्रकाशा[^१५७] न्यग्रोधादयस् ते ऽपि न सीमायाम् एव रोहन्त्य् अन्यत्रापि जायन्ते ततः संदेह आभासत्वात् । यत्र पुनर् इयं संभावना नास्ति तत्र प्रमाणम् एव लिङ्गानि । 


[^१५७]:
     M G DK: prakāśyā

**साक्षिप्रत्ययः** साक्षिहेतुकः । साक्षिणः प्रत्ययो यत्रेति । **विनिश्चयः** तत्त्वाधिगमः । संशयितलिङ्गे अलिङ्गे वा सीमाविवादे साक्षिहेतुको निर्णय इति तात्पर्यम् ॥ ८.२५३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

“How can there be a doubt, when the marks are there?”

If some one were to come and secretly remove the hidden marks to another
place, this would give rise to uncertainty. And as for the open public
marks—in the shape of the *Nyagrodha* and other trees,—it is not that
these trees are to be found on boundaries only; as a matter of fact,
they grow in other places also. It is for these reasons that the said
marks are not always reliable, and hence doubts are likely to arise.

In a case where there is no possibility of such invalidating
circumstances, the marks themselves are sufficient proof.

‘*Dependent upon witnesses*’—*i.e*., due to witnesses. The settlement,
ascertainment, is such as has the witnesses alone for its basis. The
meaning of the verse is that in cases where the marks are doubtful, or
where there are no marks at all, the dispute regarding boundaries can be
settled only by oral testimony.—(253).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 205), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Grameyaka*’ are ‘village-residents,’—their ‘*kula*’
means ‘crowd’,—*vivādinaḥ*’, ‘of the disputants’, is to be construed
with ‘*samakṣam*’, ‘in the presence of.’

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.151) to the effect that the witnesses and
*Sāmantas* should be put on oath and then questioned regarding the
boundary, in the presence of corporations, guilds and so forth.
*Balambhaṭṭī* has the following notes:—‘*Grameyakāḥ*’ are the residents
of the villages,—their ‘*kula*’ are *crowds*; or ‘*kula*’ may be taken
as standing for guilds and corporations &c.,—‘*Sīmāni*,’ ‘in regard to
the boundary.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.253-264)  
**

*Nārada* (11.2, 3, 7, 8-10, 12).—‘In all disputes regarding landed
property or boundaries, the decision rests with the neighbours, the
inhabitants of the same town or village, the members of the same
community, and the senior inhabitants of the district;—as also with
those who live outside on the outskirts of the village, and who live by
the tilling of fields situated in those parts, and with herdsmen,
bird-catchers, hunters and other foresters. Should the neighbours speak
falsely, when called upon to decide a question of this sort, they shall
all be punished, one by one, by the King,—each having to pay the fine of
the middlemost amercement. The corporation, the senior inhabitants of
the district and the rest also shall receive the punishment; they shall
have to pay the fine of the first degree, if they make false statements.
The boundary should not be fixed by any one man singlehanded, even
though he be a reliable person; this business should be entrusted to a
plurality of persons, because it is an affair of importance. Should a
single man undertake to fix the boundary, he should do so after having
kept a fast, in a collected frame of mind, wearing a garland of red
flowers and a red cloak, having strewn earth on his head. According to
this rule, let all disputes he decided in regard to houses, gardens,
water-reservoirs, sanctuaries and the rest, as also the space
intermediate between two villages.’

*Bṛhaspati* (19.8-15).—‘In disputes regarding a house or field, the
decision rests with the neighbours, as well as with the inhabitants of
that town or village, or with members of the same community and the
elders of the district;—likewise with husbandmen, artisans, servants,
cowherds, hunters, gleaners, root-diggers, fishermen, kinsmen, criminals
and robbers. After having been adjured by imprecations befitting their
station, they shall determine the boundary, and shall indicate the marks
deposited underground, as evidence. In default of witnesses and signs,
even a single person, agreeable to both parties may fix the boundary,
wearing a garland of red flowers and a red cloak, putting earth on his
head, adhering to truth, and having kept a fast. Neighbours born in the
district, though they may be living abroad, are natives of the place,
and as such may he consulted in such disputes,—What they, as honest and
impartial men, should declare, shall be held to be decisive;—thus
justice will not be violated. Those are witnesses in a suit of this kind
who know the title of acquisition, the size, the duration of possession,
the name and the characteristic features of the land under dispute. The
same rule holds good in all suits concerning immovable property. If the
statements of the deponents do not agree, they shall be made to pay the
fine of the highest degree.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.152-154).—‘An even number of neighbours—four, eight or
ten—shall determine the boundary, wearing red garlands and clothes and
placing earth upon their heads. If they speak falsely, they should each
be punished by the King with the fine of the middle degree. In the
absence of persons cognisant with the boundary, and of boundary-marks,
the King himself shall determine the boundary. This same rule applies to
disputes relating to gardens, temples, villages, drinking fountains,
houses and parks; as also to streams and drains of rain-water.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 759, *et seq*.).—‘In the absence of witnesses,
neighbours and senior inhabitants and natives of the district shall he
consulted. In the absence of neighbours, disputes between lìelds, and
also between towns and villages, should he determined by reference to
even those who are not neighbours. When the immediate neighbours are
found to be tainted with partiality, the next neighbours shall ho
consulted;—so on and on; always discarding those interested and partial,
the King shall determine the boundary in consultation with other natives
of the place. If a single person, accepted by both parties, should seek
to determine the boundary, he should proceed to do it, clad in red
clothes and placing earth on his head. If even a number of men who have
been brought together fail to determine the boundary, cither through
fear or through greed, they should be made to pay the fine of the
highest degree. If they speak without knowledge, they should be
punished; and if, on reconsideration of the boundary, they be found to
have deposed falsely, they should he made to pay the fine of the highest
degree.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.13-15).—‘In a dispute about a house or a field, reliance
may he placed on the deposition of neighbours. If the statements of the
neighbours disagree, documents may be taken as proof. If conflicting
documents are produced, reliance may he placed upon the statements of
aged inhabitants of the village or town, and on those of guilds and
corporations.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

[न कुतश्चिल् लिङ्ग्]ओत्पत्ताव् उभयथा लिङ्गानुस्मृतौ च साक्षिप्रत्ययः ॥ ८.२५२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

253	If there be a doubt even on inspection of the marks, the settlement of a dispute regarding boundaries shall depend on witnesses.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/254_grAmIyaka-kulAnA~n_cha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>254 ग्रामीयक-कुलानाञ् च ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ग्रामीयक-कुलानां च  
समक्षं सीम्नि साक्षिणः [मेधातिथिपाठः - ग्रामेयक-] ।  
प्रष्टव्याः सीमलिङ्गानि  
तयोश् चैव विवादिनोः [मेधातिथिपाठः - सीमालिङ्गानि]  ॥ ८.२५४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/254_grAmIyaka-kulAnA~n_cha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Witnesses regarding boundaries shall be questioned in regard to the boundary-marks, in the presence of an assembly of villagers and also of the two contending parties.—(254)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद्य् अप्य् असंख्यातपुरुषको ग्रामस् तथापि द्वौ विवादिनौ द्वयोर् ग्रामयोर् भवतस् तयोः समक्षम् अन्येषां च **ग्रामेयककुलानां च** ग्रामीणपुरुषसमूहानां **समक्षं सीम्नि साक्षिणः प्रष्टव्याः** । साक्षिप्रश्नकाले सर्वैर् ग्रामीणैर् दत्तव्यवहारकैर् अपि संनिहितैर् भवितव्यं नार्थिप्रत्यर्थिनोर् अन्यतरो वक्तुं लभते- "आवयोर् विशिष्टार्थे[^१५८] विवादे किम् एते संनिधीयन्ते" । अथ वा ये ऽन्ये सामन्तेभ्यो ग्रामेभ्यः केचिद् वृद्धतमाः साक्ष्ये समुद्दिष्टास् तद्ग्रामीणैर् अन्यैः संनिहितैर् भवितव्यम् । यतस् तैर् वृद्धेभ्यः श्रुतं भवति तत्समक्षं पृच्छ्यमाना न विपर्यन्ति वृद्धाः । **सीमालिङ्गानि** । यत्र लिङ्गान्य् उभयथा तत्र वृद्धेभ्यस् तानि निश्चित्य, सीम्नि[^१५९] निश्चयः । असत्सु लिङ्गेषु सीम्न्य् एव साक्ष्यं पृच्छते- "कात्र सीमा" इति ॥ ८.२५४ ॥


[^१५९]:
     J omits: tāni niścitya sīmni


[^१५८]:
     M G DK: evaṃ visṛṣṭārthe
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Though a village contains innumerable inhabitants, yet, as a rule, only
two men—one from each of the two villages—become parties to a
boundary-dispute; and it is in the presence of these two men, as also in
that of ‘*an* *assembly of villagers*,’—*i.e*., a concourse of the
inhabitants of the two villages,—that ‘*witnesses regarding boundaries
should be questioned*.’ At the time that witnesses are being examined,
all the villagers should he present as interested in the case; and it is
not open to either of the two persons to say—‘the dispute is between us
two persons, why should these men remain here?’

Or, the meaning may be, that, when a few very old inhabitants of the
neighbouring villages have been called as witnesses, it is necessary
that other inhabitants also of those villages should he present; since
the latter would have heard of the exact boundaries from the older
people, so that, if examined in their presence, the witnesses would not
lie.

‘*Boundary-marks*.’—When there are marks in support of the contention of
both parties, the decision is to be arrived at with the help of the
deposition of witnesses. And in cases where there are no marks at all,
the witnesses are questioned regarding the boundary itself.—(254)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 205), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Grameyaka*’ are ‘village-residents,’—their ‘*kula*’
means ‘crowd’,—*vivādinaḥ*’, ‘of the disputants’, is to be construed
with ‘*samakṣam*’, ‘in the presence of.’

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.151) to the effect that the witnesses and
*Sāmantas* should be put on oath and then questioned regarding the
boundary, in the presence of corporations, guilds and so forth.
*Balambhaṭṭī* has the following notes:—‘*Grameyakāḥ*’ are the residents
of the villages,—their ‘*kula*’ are *crowds*; or ‘*kula*’ may be taken
as standing for guilds and corporations &c.,—‘*Sīmāni*,’ ‘in regard to
the boundary.’

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 759);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (p. 111a),
which explains ‘*grameyaka*’ as ‘inhabitant of the village’;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 141a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.253-264)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.253].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रश्नविधिः ॥ ८.२५३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

254	The witnesses, (giving evidence) regarding a boundary, shall be examined concerning the landmarks in the presence of the crowd of the villagers and also of the two litigants.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/255_te_pRShTAs.md">
<details open><summary><h3>255 ते पृष्टास् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ते पृष्टास् तु यथा ब्रूयुः  
समस्ताः सीम्नि निश्चयम् ।  
निबध्नीयात् तथा सीमां  
सर्वांस् तांश् चैव नामतः  ॥ ८.२५५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/255_te_pRShTAs.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The opinion that, on being questioned, they unanimously declare in regard to the boundary,—according to that he shall lay down the boundary, recording also the names of them all.—(255)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**ते** साक्षिणो **यथा** यादृशं **निश्चयं** **ब्रूयुः** **स्मस्ताः** सर्व एव । न पुनर् वाक्यभेदोक्तौ न्यायः "द्वैधे च बहूनाम्" (य्ध् २.८०) इति । **निबध्नीयात्** पत्रके लिखेत् ।[^१६०] साक्षिणश् च नाम विभागेन[^१६१] ॥ ८.२५५ ॥


[^१६१]:
     M G DK: vibhāge (DK na) sākṣimātreṇa


[^१६०]:
     M G DK add: tatra
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When the witnesses declare an opinion ‘*unanimously*’—all together; and
there is no difference of opinion among them.

In the case of a difference of opinion, the opinion of a majority of
them should be accepted.

‘*Lay down*’—write down upon a piece of paper;—as also the names of the
witnesses.—(255).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 759);—in *Mitākṣarā* (p. 152), to
the effect that when the witnesses thus questioned unanimously declare
the boundary point, the king shall, for fear of the settlement being
forgotten, record this settlement in writing, setting forth therein all
the boundary marks shown by them as also the names of the witnesses.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 205);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(111a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 141a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.253-264)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.253].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

निबन्धनं लेख्यम् अपि स्मरणार्थं तल् लिखेत् ॥ ८.२५४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

255	As they, being questioned, unanimously decide, even so he shall record the boundary (in writing), together with their names.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/256_shirobhis_te.md">
<details open><summary><h3>256 शिरोभिस् ते ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

शिरोभिस् ते गृहीत्वोर्वीं  
स्रग्विणो रक्त-वाससः ।  
सुकृतैः शापिथाः स्वैः  
स्वैर् नयेयुस् ते समञ्जसम्  ॥ ८.२५६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/256_shirobhis_te.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Placing earth upon their heads, wearing garlands and red clothes, and being sworn by their respective meritorious deeds, they shall decide honestly.—(256)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

मूर्ध्ना** ऊर्वीं** पृथ्वीं मृल्लोष्टकान् **गृहीत्वा** साक्षिणः **स्रग्विणो** यथासंभवं माल्यधरा रक्तवर्णकुसुमधरा **रक्तवाससो** लोहिताच्छादनाः । यद्य् अपि शुक्लस्य वर्णान्तरापादने ऽपि रञ्जिर् वर्तते भूयांस् तु लोहिते प्रयोगो रक्तो गौर् लोहित इति । भयसञ्जननार्थं चैतत् । लोहितवाससश् च सशूका[^१६२] भवन्ति । "यद् अस्माकं सुकृतं किंचिद् अर्जितम् अस्ति तन् निष्फलम् अस्तु" इति वाच्यन्ते । **स्वैः स्वैर्** इति वीप्सया विशेषनामभिः सुकृतं कथयेयुः ।[^१६३] कन्यादानं[^१६४] तीर्थस्नानं चेत्यादि । स्मञ्जसं क्रियाविसेषणम् । सत्याद् अनपेतऋजुर् धार्मिको यो मार्गस् तेन नयेयुः । **समञ्जसम्** क्रियाविशेषणम्। सत्याद् अनपेत ऋजुर् धार्मिको यो मार्गस् तेन नयेयुः । **समञ्जसम्** ऋजु स्पष्टम् इत्य् एको ऽर्थः । सत्यव्यवहारश् च स्पष्ट इत्य् उक्तं **समञ्जसम्** इति ॥ ८.२५६ ॥


[^१६४]:
     M G J: kasyādānaṃ (but Jha's translation presupposes kanyādānam)


[^१६३]:
     M G DK add: tat


[^१६२]:
     J: śuddhā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

On their heads the witnesses shall place ‘*earth*’—*i.e*., clods of
earth.

‘*Wearing garlands*’—wearing chaplets as far as possible of red flowers.

‘*Wearing red clothes*’—dressed in red. Though the root ‘*rañji*’ (from
which the term ‘*rakta*’ is derived) denotes only *colouring*, *i.e*.,
imparting some colour to what is white, yet it is generally used in the
sense of *red*; as we find in such expressions as ‘the *rakta* cow’
(where the *red* cow is meant).

All this is meant to strike terror in the minds of the witnesses; and
also people dressed in red are supposed to be clean.

In swearing, each man should be made to pronounce the words—‘whatever
merit I may have acquired by my deeds, may all that become futile!’

‘*Respective*’—‘*svaiḥ svaiḥ*’;—the repetition is meant to convey the
idea that each of them should mention his ‘meritorious deeds,’—such as
the giving away of a daughter, bathing in sacred places, and so forth.

‘*Samañjasam*,’ ‘*honestly*,’ is an adverb. The meaning is that they
shall decide the case in a way that may he in accordance with truth,
straightforward and righteous. The term ‘*samañjasa*’ is synonymous with
‘honest’ and ‘clear’; and as a ‘truthful act’ is always ‘clear’ the text
has used the term ‘*samañjasam*’—(256).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (p. 152), to the effect that the
witnesses, the Sāmantas and others should indicate the boundary after
being put on oath.

It adds that the plural number in ‘*nayeyuḥ*’ indicates that the
boundary cannot be determined on the basis of only *two* witnesses; the
admission of one being permitted by Nārada.

*Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the following notes:—‘*Svaiḥ svaiḥ*’ means ‘by the
deeds of the caste to which each of them belongs’, —‘*urvīm*’, a piece
of earth,—‘*tām*’ (which is its reading for ‘*tam*’)
boundary,—‘*Samañjasam*’ is an adverb modifying the verb ‘*nayeyuḥ*.’

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 762);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (p. 111b);—and
in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 141a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.253-264)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.253].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

नयनविधिः ॥ ८.२५५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

256	Let them, putting earth on their heads, wearing chaplets (of red flowers) and red dresses, being sworn each by (the rewards for) his meritorious deeds, settle (the boundary) in accordance with the truth.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/257_yathoktena_nayantas.md">
<details open><summary><h3>257 यथोक्तेन नयन्तस् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यथोक्तेन नयन्तस् ते  
पूयन्ते सत्यसाक्षिणः ।  
विपरीतं नयन्तस् तु  
दाप्याः स्युर् द्विशतं दमम्  ॥ ८.२५७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/257_yathoktena_nayantas.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If they decide in the right manner, they, being truthful witnesses, become purified; but if they decide contrariwise, they should be made to pay a fine of two hundred.—(257)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

प्रमाणान्तरलिङ्गेभ्यो ऽन्यथासंबवद्भ्यः प्रत्ययितरपुरुषेभ्यो मिथ्यात्वे ऽवधारिते,[^१६५] प्रत्येकं द्विशतो दण्डः । एकैकस्य साक्षित्वात् साक्षिणां च दण्ड्यत्वात्, न हि व्यासज्य वदन्ति साक्ष्यम् । सत्यप्रधानाः साक्षिणः **सत्यसाक्षिणः** **पूयन्ते** अनृताभिधानेन पापेन न संबध्यन्त इति । **यथोक्तेन** याथातथ्येन । न हि शब्दात्मकस्य वचनस्यात्रावसरः । प्रमाणान्तरसंवादमात्रम् अनेन लक्ष्यते । अथ वा यथाशास्त्रम् उक्तेन सत्येनेति यावत् । शास्त्रे हि सत्यं वक्तव्यम् इत्य् एवम् उक्तम् अतो यथोक्तेन सत्येनेत्य् उक्तं भवति ॥ ८.२५७ ॥


[^१६५]:
     M G: vadhyate
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If, on reference to other proofs and to other more reliable witnesses,
it is found that the witnesses have not deposed truthfully, each of them
shall he fined two hundred; because each of them is a ‘witness’ and that
penalty has been prescribed for the ‘witness’; and all the witnesses do
not depose collectively.

‘*Truthful witnesses*’;—*i.e*., witnesses who lay a great stress upon
veracity.

‘*Become purified*,’;—*i.e*., do not incur the guilt of telling a lie.

‘*In the right manner*’;—*i.e*., in accordance with facts. This phrase
cannot be taken as referring to anything that has been *said* (which is
what the term ‘*ukta*’ actually denotes); all that is meant is that what
they declare is corroborated by other proofs. Or, it may mean ‘in
accordance with what has been declared in the scriptures,’ in the way of
truthfulness. It has been declared in the scriptures that ‘one shall
speak the truth’; hence the phrase ‘*yathoktena*’ means *in a truthful
manner*.—(257)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.153), as laying down the penalty
for witnesses lying in connection with boundaries;—in *Vivādaratnākara*
(p. 211), which explains ‘*Satyasākṣinaḥ*’ as ‘those persons who depose
truthfully to the boundary,’—and ‘*dviśatam*’ as ‘two hundred
*paṇas*’;—in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 97);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p.
95);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (112a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
141a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.253-264)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.253].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

स्तुतिः प्ररोचनार्था । दण्डश् च यथोक्तः । विपरीतनयनं त्व् अन्येन व्यवहारान्तरेण ज्ञातव्यम् ॥ ८.२५६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

257	If they determine (the boundary) in the manner stated, they are guiltless (being) veracious witnesses; but if they determine it unjustly, they shall be compelled to pay a fine of two hundred (panas).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/258_sAxyabhAve_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>258 साक्ष्यभावे तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

साक्ष्यभावे तु चत्वारो  
ग्रामाः सामन्तवासिनः [मेधातिथिपाठः - ग्रामसीमान्तवासिनः] ।  
सीमाविनिर्णयं कुर्युः  
प्रयता राजसंनिधौ  ॥ ८.२५८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/258_sAxyabhAve_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the absence of witnesses four honest inhabitants of neighbouring villages shall make the determination of the boundary, in the presence of the king.—(258)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

ग्रामसामन्ताः **सीमान्तवासिनः**[^१६७] प्रष्टव्याः । तेषां वचने निश्चयं कुर्यात् । **प्रयता** साक्षिधर्मेण नान्तरेण[^१६८] । **राजसंनिधाव्** इति श्लोकपूरणम् । न तु सामन्ताः स्वेच्छया राजवन् निश्चिन्वन्ति ॥ ८.२५८ ॥


[^१६८]:
     J: śāstrāntareṇa


[^१६७]:
     M G: sīmāntaravāsinaḥ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Inhabitants of neighbouring villages should he questioned, and decision
should be arrived at with the help of what they say.

‘*Honest*,’—*i.e*., possessing the qualifications of the ‘witness’ as
laid down in the texts.

‘*In the presence of the king*’—This has been added for the purpose of
filling up the metre; as neighbours never volunteer to decide disputes,
in the manner of kings.—(258)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“Men from the four surrounding villages are meant, as Kullūka suggests.
The correctness of this opinion is proved by the fact that the land
grants usually mention the four boundaries of the villages given
away.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.152), which remarks that
neighbours are to be called in only in the absence of regular witnesses.
*Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the note that the number ‘four’ stands for any number
from *four* upwards,—and that the epithet ‘*prayatāḥ*’ precludes the
calling of wicked men.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 760);—and in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 206),
which adds the following notes:—‘*Grāmāḥ*,’
villagers,—‘*simāntavāsinaḥ*,’ persons living near (the disputed
boundary),—‘*vinirṇayam kuryuḥ*,’ should determine the boundary on the
basis of the tradition current among them. It explains ‘*sāmanta*’ as
‘persons living near the disputed boundary.’

*Aparārka* (p. 759) has explained the term ‘*sāmanta*’ as ‘people seen
near the spot,’ ‘*samantataḥ ye upalakṣyante*.’ Hence Medhātithi’s
reading ‘*sāmantavāsinaḥ*’ is to be explained as ‘*grāmasya samantāt
vāsinaḥ*,’ ‘people living near about the village.’

It is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (111a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.253-264)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.253].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पूर्वे ऽनुभाविनः । इमे तु सामन्ताः कर्णपरंपरया श्रुतवन्तः ॥ ८.२५७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

258	On failure of witnesses (from the two villages, men of) the four neighbouring villages, who are pure, shall make (as witnesses) a decision concerning the boundary in the presence of the king.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/259_sAmantAnAm_abhAve.md">
<details open><summary><h3>259 सामन्तानाम् अभावे ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सामन्तानाम् अभावे तु  
मौलानां सीम्नि साक्षिणाम् ।  
इमान् अप्य् अनुयुञ्जीत  
पुरुषान् वन-गोचरान्  ॥ ८.२५९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/259_sAmantAnAm_abhAve.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the absence of such original inhabitants of neighbouring villages as could be witnesses in regard to the boundary, the king may examine these (following) frequenters of forests also.—(259)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सामन्तानां मौलानाम्** इति विशेषणविशेष्यभावः स्तुत्यर्थः । ग्रामप्रतिष्ठानकाले[^१६९] भवा उत्पत्तिसहभुवो **मौला** उच्यन्ते । ते च **सामन्ता** नित्याः, नित्यसंनिहितत्वात् । तेषाम् अप्य् अभावः कथंचिद् उच्छन्नत्वात् । तदा का[^१७०] गतिः । तदा **इमान् अपि** वक्ष्यमाणान् पृच्छेत् । 


[^१७०]:
     M G: sā


[^१६९]:
     M G: grāmapratiṣṭhā na tatkāle

अथ वा **मौला** अनुभाविनः, **सामन्ता** व्याक्ख्याताः, व्यवहर्तव्याः । मौलानां पूर्वोक्तानाम् अभावे सामन्ताः प्रमाणम् । तदभावे **वनगोचरान् विनियुञ्जीत**[^१७१] निपुणतः पृच्छेत् ॥ ८.२५९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Original inhabitants*’—The epithet has been added with a view to
indicate their importance. Those persons who were living in the village
at the time of its foundation, and who are co-eval with it, are called
‘original’; such inhabitants of the neighbouring villages remain on the
spot constantly. There would be ‘absence’ of these, on account of their
having become dispersed, for some reason or the other.

What is the remedy, if these are not available?

In that case the king shall question ‘*these*’—the persons going to be
mentioned in the next verse.

Or, ‘*maulāḥ*’ may be taken to mean ‘experienced.’—‘*Sāmantāḥ*’ as
explained above. And the meaning may he—‘In the absence of experienced
people, ordinary neighbours may he regarded as reliable authority, and
in the absence of these latter, the frequenters of forests should he
carefully examined.’—(259)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 209), which explains
‘*maulāḥ*’ as ‘persons who have lived in the village ever since it came
into existence,’—and ‘*anuyuñjīta*’ as ‘should question’;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyvahāra, p. 272);—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p.
790);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (111b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
140b), which says that the foresters and others are to be asked only
when there are no such persons available as are cultivators of lands
lying near the disputed boundary.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.253-264)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.253].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

तदभावे तु वनगोचराः प्रमाणं स्युः ॥ ८.२५८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

259	On failure of neighbours (who are) original inhabitants (of the country and can be) witnesses with respect to the boundary, (the king) may hear the evidence even of the following inhabitants of the forest.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/260_vyAdhA~n_shAkunikAn.md">
<details open><summary><h3>260 व्याधाञ् शाकुनिकान् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

व्याधाञ् शाकुनिकान् गोपान्  
कैवर्तान् मूलखानकान् ।  
व्यालग्राहान् उञ्छवृत्तीन्  
अन्यांश् च वनचारिणः  ॥ ८.२६० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/260_vyAdhA~n_shAkunikAn.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Hunters, Fowlers, Cowherds, Fishermen, Root-diggers, Snake-catchers, Gleaners and other Foresters.—(260)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

एते[^१७२] वनानि[^१७३] भ्राम्यन्ति । ग्राममध्येन गच्छन्तः कदाचित् तद्वृत्तं[^१७४] विद्युः । ते हि तेन पथा गच्छन्तो विवादास्पदं प्रदेशं पूर्वं कांश्चित् पुरुषान् कृषतो दृष्ट्वा पृच्छेयुः- "को ऽयं ग्रामो यो भवद्भिः कृष्यते" इति । एवमादिना संभवति पूर्वानुभवः । 


[^१७४]:
     M G: taddattaṃ


[^१७३]:
     M G DK add: ca


[^१७२]:
     M G add: hi grāmavāsinas tatra; DK adds: hi agrāmavāsinas tatra

**व्याधा** मृगयाजीविनः । तेषाम् अपि वनाद् भ्रष्टमृघम् अनुधावतां भवति ग्रामसंबन्धः । एवं **शाकुनिकाः** शकुनिबन्धजीविनः । तदन्वेषणे ये सर्वान् ग्रामान् आगोचरयन्ति । **गोपा** गवां तृणविशेषज्ञानाय तत्र तत्र परिभ्राम्यन्ति । **कैवर्ता** दाशास् तडागखननादिजीविनस् तत्र तत्र गच्छन्ति क्वास्माकीनं कर्मोपयुज्यते । **मूलखानका**[^१७५] मूलं वृक्षादेः खनयन्ति स्थूलकाशादेः । **व्यालग्रहाः** सर्पग्राहिणः, जीविकार्थं ते ऽपि सर्पांस् तं तं प्रदेशम् अन्विच्छन्ति । अतः तेषाम् अपि पारिग्रामिकैर् बहुभिः संबन्धः । **उञ्छवृत्तयो** ऽपि दरिद्रा अनेकग्रामपर्यटनेन यात्रामात्रं[^१७६] निर्वर्तयन्ति । **अन्यांश् च** फलकुसुमेन्धनार्थिनः ॥ ८.२६० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

These persons wander about in the forests surrounding villages, without
entering the villages themselves, and might know the exact boundaries.
Passing by that way, they might have seen some persons cultivating the
fields lying within the disputed area, and might have asked them—‘what
is this village, in which you are cultivating fields?’ In this manner,
it is quite possible for them to have acquired the required experience.

‘*Hunters*’;—those who live by hunting; these also come into contact
with villages, when pursuing game that has escaped from forests.

Similarly ‘fowlers,’ who live by bird-catching, roam about all the
villages, in search of birds.

‘*Cowherds*’ roam about in search of particular kinds of fodder for
their cattle.

‘*Fishermen*,’ ‘*Dāśas*,’—those who live by digging tanks, etc., wander
about in search of work.

‘*Boot-diggers*,’—those who dig up the roots of thick grasses and other
plants.

‘*Snake-catchers*,’—those who catch serpents, by way of livelihood.
These men are likely to visit several places, and thus come into contact
with the inhabitants of several villages.

‘*Gleaners*’;—very poor people who, after wandering about several
villages, earn just enough to serve as food for the day.

‘*And others*’—who go about searching fruits, flowers, fuel and such
things.—(260)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vanācāriṇaḥ*’—‘Those who roam about forests in search of flowers,
fruits and fuel’ (Medhātithi);—‘*śabaras* and other foresters’
(Nārāyaṇa).

*Medhātithi* does not read ‘*śataśaḥ*’ as Hopkins says.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.152), on which *Bālambhaṭṭī* has
the following notes:—‘*Vyādhān*,’ fowlers,—‘*śākunikān*,’ those who live
by killing birds,—‘*kaivartān*,’ those who live by digging tanks
etc.,—‘*mūlakhātakān*,’ those living by digging up the roots of trees
etc.,—‘*vyālagrahān*,’ serpent-catchers,—‘*uñchavṛttinaḥ*’ those who
live by gleaning corn,—‘*vanagocarān*,’ those who roam about in forests
in search of flowers, fruits and such things.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 209);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 272), which adds that ‘*anyān*’ includes persons whose
business it is to dig up and raise boundary marks;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(111b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 140b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.253-264)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.253].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

260	(Viz.) hunters, fowlers, herdsmen, fishermen, root-diggers, snake-catchers, gleaners, and other foresters.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/261_te_pRShTAs.md">
<details open><summary><h3>261 ते पृष्टास् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ते पृष्टास् तु यथा ब्रूयुः  
सीमासंधिषु लक्षणम् ।  
तत् तथा स्थापयेद् राजा  
धर्मेण ग्रामयोर् द्वयोः  ॥ ८.२६१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/261_te_pRShTAs.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

As they, on being questioned in fairness, declare the marks of boundary-lines between two villages, even so shall the king fix it.—(261)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**ते धर्मेण पृष्टा** इति योजना । सीमाश् च ताः संधयश् च **सीमासंधयः** । ग्रामद्वयसंयोगः **संधिः** । स च **सीमैव** । **लक्षणम्** ज्ञापकम् ॥ ८.२६१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Construe ‘*dharmeṇa*,’ ‘*in fairness*’ with ‘*pṛṣṭāḥ*,’ ‘*questioned*.’

‘*Sīmāsandhi*’ is to be construed as an appositional compound—that
‘*sandhi*,’ ‘line,’ which is the ‘*sīmā*,’ ‘boundary.’—The ‘line’
representing the point where two villages meet, and this being what is
meant by ‘boundary.’

‘*Mark*’—indicative.—(261)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 210);—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (111b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.253-264)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.253].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उपसंहारार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.२६० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

261	As they, being examined, declare the marks for the meeting of the boundaries (to be), even so the king shall justly cause them to be fixed between the two villages.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/262_xetra-kUpa-taDAgAnAm_ArAmasya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>262 क्षेत्र-कूप-तडागानाम् आरामस्य ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

क्षेत्र-कूप-तडागानाम्  
आरामस्य गृहस्य च ।  
सामन्तप्रत्ययो ज्ञेयः  
सीमासेतुविनिर्णयः  ॥ ८.२६२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/262_xetra-kUpa-taDAgAnAm_ArAmasya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of fields, walls, tanks, gardens and houses, the decision regarding boundary-marks is dependent upon the neighbours.—(262)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**आराम** उद्यानभूमिः शाकवाटश् च । **सामन्त**प्रंआणकस् तत्र निश्चयः[^१७७] । व्याधादिनिवृत्त्यर्थम् इदम् उच्यते । **सीमासेतुः** सीमाबन्धः । सीमाविभावनार्थं य आबध्यते स्थाप्यते ॥ ८.२६२ ॥


[^१७७]:
     M G DK (1: 937): tattvaniścayaḥ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Garden*’—stands for park-lands, as well as vegetable yards.

The neighbours are the only source of authority for decisions regarding
these.

This has been added with a view to preclude the evidence of hunters and
others (mentioned in the preceding two verses).

‘*Boundary-marks*’;—demarcation of boundary, which is done for the
indication of the exact boundary.—(262)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 218)—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 62).
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सीम्नि गुरुत्वाद् अर्थस्य कदाचिद् दशवर्षाणि नाभियोगं कुर्युः । अतस् तत्र ऽन भोगेन प्रणश्यति" इत्य् उक्तम् । क्षेत्रादिषु [त्व्] अत्यल्पत्वाद् अर्थस्य "यत् किंचिद् दशवर्षानि" इत्य् अयम् एव पक्ष आश्रीयते । अत एषां **सामन्तप्रत्ययो** निर्णय उच्यते । यथैवान्येषां द्रव्याणां साक्षिप्रत्ययो निर्णयः, एवम् अमीषाम् अपीति ॥ ८.२६१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

262	The decision concerning the boundary-marks of fields, wells, tanks, of gardens and houses depends upon (the evidence of) the neighbours.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/263_sAmantAsh_chen.md">
<details open><summary><h3>263 सामन्ताश् चेन् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सामन्ताश् चेन् मृषा ब्रूयुः  
सेतौ विवादतां नृणाम् ।  
सर्वे पृथक् पृथग् दण्ड्या  
राज्ञा मध्यमसाहसम्  ॥ ८.२६३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/263_sAmantAsh_chen.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of men disputing about boundary-marks, if the neighbours depose falsely, all of them should be severally punished by the king with the ‘middle amercement.’—(268)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वेभ्यः **सामन्तानाम्** अधिको दण्डः । **पृथक् पृथग्** इत्य् अनुवादः, उक्तत्वान् न्यायस्य । क्षेत्रादिप्रातिवेश्या अवश्यं ज्ञातारो भवन्ति । प्रत्यासन्नतरतः[^१७८] एषां दण्डमहत्त्वम् । सामन्तानां तु परकीयसीमावेदनं नावश्यम् इति द्विशतो दमो ऽनुवर्त्यः । तेन ग्रामसीमायां द्रष्टॄणां सामन्तानां च द्विशतः । 


[^१७८]:
     M G: pratyāsottarataḥ; DK: pratyāsattitaḥ

<u>ये तु</u> सामन्तशब्दम् आश्रित्य ग्रामक्षेत्रादिसीमयोः सामन्तत्वात् तुल्यदण्डत्वम् आहुस् ते न्यायविरोधाद् उपेक्षणीयाः ॥ ८.२६३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The punishment of the neighbours is to be severer than that laid down
above (in 257).

‘*Severally*.’—This is a mere reiteration, the law on this point having
been already declared before.

The holders of neighbouring fields are sure to know the right boundary;
hence if they happen to give false evidence, their punishment should be
heavy. As for ordinary neighbours (living in the neighbourhood), it is
not necessary that they should be cognisant of the exact boundaries of
fields, etc.; hence in their case the fine is to be ‘two hundred,’ as
laid down before (257). Hence in the case of the boundaries between two
villages, such persons as may have been seeing it, as also the
neighbours, are to be fined ‘two hundred’ (if they give false evidence).

On the strength of the use of the term ‘neighbours’ in the present
context, some people have held that the penalty should be the same, both
in the case of boundaries between villages and that of boundaries
between fields. But this view is contrary to all reason, and hence
should he ignored.—(263)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 211), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Setu*,’ boundary ,—‘ *pṛthak pṛthak*,’ each
severally, each one individually being the ‘witness;’—in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 95);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (112a)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.253-264)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.253].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सीम्साक्षिणाम् अयं विशेषदण्डः ॥ ८.२६२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

263	Should the neighbours give false evidence, when men dispute about a boundary-mark, the king shall make each of them pay the middlemost amercement as a fine.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/264_gRhan_taDAgam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>264 गृहन् तडागम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

गृहं तडागम् आरामं  
क्षेत्रं वा भीषया हरन् ।  
शतानि पञ्च दण्ड्यः स्याद्  
अज्ञानाद् द्विशतो दमः  ॥ ८.२६४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/264_gRhan_taDAgam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a person, by intimidation, appropriates a house, a tank, a garden, or a field, he shall be fined five hundred; but only two hundred, if he does it in ignorance.—(264)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

क्षेत्रादिप्रसङ्गाद् इदम् उच्यते । **भीषा**ग्रहणं[^१७९] निमित्तोपलक्षणार्थम् । अस्यैवैतन् निश्चितम् इत्य् एवं जानतो हरतः पञ्चशतो दण्डः । मध्यमसाहसे प्रकृते पञ्चशतग्रहणं निमित्तभेदे न्यूनाधिकदण्डार्थम् । पूर्वत्र वा संख्यानम् अविवक्षितं[^१८०] मन्यन्ते । तेन[^१८१] "व्यवहारं लेखयामि," "राज्ञा[^१८२] दण्डयामि," "चौरैर् दोषयामि" इति भयप्रदर्शनेन हरति । तस्यां दण्डो निमित्तान्तरानुकल्पः ॥ ८.२६४ ॥


[^१८२]:
     M G: rājani


[^१८१]:
     J omits: tena


[^१८०]:
     DK: pūrve enāṃ saṃkhyām avivakṣitāṃ 


[^१७९]:
     M G: sīmāgrahaṇa-; J: bhīgrahaṇaṃ; DK: vibhīṣāgrahaṇaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the course of dealing with fields, etc., this additional law is here
added.

‘*Intimidation*’—has been mentioned only as an example, of the methods
of misappropriation employed; the meaning is that—‘if a man knowing the
field to belong to another person, takes possession of it, he shall he
fined five hundred.’

‘Middle amercement’ (which is 500) having been already mentioned in the
preceding verse, its reiteration here is meant to indicate that the
amount shall vary according to the methods of misappropriation. Or it
may be, as some people hold, that in the preceding verse, no
significance is meant to be attached to the exact number.

The man appropriates another’s property by such intimidations as—‘I
shall file a suit and have him punished by the king,’ or ‘I shall have
him robbed by thieves,’ and so forth; and in this case the fine shall he
five hundred, while in other oases, it is to be some other form of
it.—(264)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.155), according to which
*ajñānāt* is meant to cover those cases where a man takes possession of
another’s garden &c. under the impression that they really belong to
himself; in which case the fine is to be only two hundred. *Bālambhaṭṭī*
has the following notes:—‘*Bhīṣayā*,’ threatening with dangers from some
other source; this includes *greed* also.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 766);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 222),
which explains ‘*bhīṣayā*,’ as ‘by arousing fear in him,’—‘*ajñānāt*’ as
‘through mistake’;—in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 98);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi*
(Calcutta, p. 64), which explains that ‘if one robs the house after
having threatened the owner, the fine is only 500 *paṇas*;’—and in
*Vīramitrodaya*, (Vyavahāra, 143b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.253-264)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.253].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ज्ञानाज्ञानहरणे ऽयं दण्डः ॥ ८.२६३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

264	He who by intimidation possesses himself of a house, a tank, a garden, or a field, shall be fined five hundred (panas); (if he trespassed) through ignorance, the fine (shall be) two hundred (panas).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/265_sImAyAm_aviShahyAyAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>265 सीमायाम् अविषह्यायाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सीमायाम् अविषह्यायां  
स्वयं राजैव धर्मवित् ।  
प्रदिशेद् भूमिम् एकेषाम्  
उपकाराद् इति स्थितिः  ॥ ८.२६५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/265_sImAyAm_aviShahyAyAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the event of the boundary being unascertainable, the righteous king shall himself assign to them their lands, on the basis of advantages. Such is the established law.—(265)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^१८३]:
     M G: eteṣām

**अविषह्या** निश्चेतुम् अशक्या, लिङ्गसाक्ष्यभावात् । **राजैव** स्वेच्छया **भूमिं** **प्रदिशेद्** दद्यात्- "इयं वो भूमिर् इयं वः" इति । **धर्मवित्** पक्षपातो नैव कस्यचित् कर्तव्य इति । एतद् आह **उपकाराद्** धेतोः । यया सीमया द्वाव् अपि ग्रामौ समोपकारौ भवतः । तेन यदि न्यूनापि कस्यचिद् भूमिः स्यात् क्षेत्रं चेत् सुगुणं बहूत्पत्तिकं तदपेक्षः प्रदेशः । ल्यब्लोपे पञ्चमी । उपकारम् अपेक्ष्य । 

अथ वा **एकेषां प्रदिशेद्** अपरेषाम् अनिश्चिताम् अपहरेत् । यदि विवादिग्रामस् तां सीमां यावद् वक्तुं न शक्नुयाद् इतरे च शक्तास् तदान्येभ्यः[^१८४] प्रदिशेत् । एवम् आत्मनो बहूनां च ग्रामीणानाम् उपकृतं भवति ॥ ८.२६५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Unascertainable*’—incapable of being determined, on account of there
being no marks or witnesses available.

‘*The king himself*’— of his own will—‘*shall assign*’—make over—‘*their
lands*’; saying—‘this is your land, that is yours.’

‘*Righteous*’;—this is added with a view to point out that the king
shall not show partiality to any party.

‘*On the basis of advantages*’—*i.e*., according to considerations of
common good ; *i.e*., he shall indicate the boundary between the two
villages in such a manner as to make the decision equally advantageous
to both parties; so that if the field assigned to one party is less in
size, it is of better quality, being more fertile.

The ablative ending in ‘*upakārāt*’ has the force of the participal
affix; the term standing for the expression ‘*upakāram apekṣya*,’
‘taking into consideration the advantages.’

Or, the text may mean that, the land may be assigned to one party, being
taken away from the other party, whose rights over it are doubtful. In a
case where the complaining village is unable to indicate the boundary,
while the other party is able to do it, he shall assign the disputed
land to the latter. In this way a great benefit would be conferred upon
the king himself, as also upon a large number of villages.—(265)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This Verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.153), to the effect that between
the two villages (disputing over their boundary), the king shall allot
the disputed plot to that one to which it would be more useful than to
the other.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 764), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Aviṣahyā*’, without any means of determination, in the shape
persons or proofs,—‘*pravishet*’ (which is its reading for
‘*pradishet*’), is equivalent to ‘*praveśayet*,’ put into
possession,—‘*upakārāt*,’ on the ground of utility.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 216), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Aviṣahyā*’, unascertainable in the absence of
witnesses,—‘*ekeṣām pradishet upakārāt*,’ he should give it to one
party, on the ground of ‘utility’ *i*. *e*., to that party which is
likely to derive greater benefit from the land in dispute; when this
benefit is found to be equally possible for both parties, then he should
divide the land between both.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhavā* (Vyavahāra, p. 275), which explains
‘*aviṣahyā*’ as ‘there being neither witnesses nor any other indications
helping to determine it;’—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, 31a);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 142,) which explains ‘*aviṣahyāyam*’ as
‘that for which no determinent is available in the shape either of
witnesses or marks.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2-153).—‘In the absence of persons conversant with the
boundary, and of boundary-marks, the lawful King himself shall determine
the boundary.’

*Nārada* (11.11, 27).—‘Should there he no persons conversant with the
true state of things, and no boundary-marks, then the King himself shall
fix the boundary between the two estates, as he thinks best.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

दूरत्वाद् अशक्योपभोगायां राजा दृष्टोपकारसंबन्धेनैकत्र प्रयच्छेत् भूमिम् । न च राज्ञो ग्रहणे तत्र दोषः । एवमर्थश् चायम् उपदेशः; अतो ऽप्रदाने ऽपि न दोषः ॥ ८.२६४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

265	If the boundary cannot be ascertained (by any evidence), let a righteous king with (the intention of) benefiting them (all), himself assign (his) land (to each); that is the settled rule.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/266_eSho.akhilenA-bhihito.md">
<details open><summary><h3>266 एषो ऽखिलेनाऽभिहितो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एषो ऽखिलेनाऽभिहितो  
धर्मः सीमाविनिर्णये ।  
अत ऊर्ध्वं प्रवक्ष्यामि  
वाक्पारुष्यविनिर्णयम्  ॥ ८.२६६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/266_eSho.akhilenA-bhihito.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Thus has the whole law relating to the demarcation of boundaries been propounded. After this I am going to expound that relating to verbal assault.—(266)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वोपसंहारो ऽपरसंक्षेपोपन्यासः श्लोकार्थः । "दण्डवाचिके" (म्ध् ८.६) इत्य् उक्त्वा क्रमभेदो लाघवाद् वाक्पारुष्यं स्यात् ततो दण्डव्यापारः । द्वन्द्वे चेतरेतरयोगाद् व्यस्तक्रमसमासार्थप्रतिपत्तेर् एकैकस्योभयार्थप्रतिपादनाद्[^१८५] दण्डशब्देन वागर्थो ऽप्य् उपात्त इति कः क्रमभेदः । तथा च[^१८६] "यथासंख्य"सूत्रारंभो (पाण् १.३.१०) महाभाष्यकारेण समर्थितः, एतद् एव दर्शनम् आश्रित्य "संज्ञासमासनिर्देशात्" (कात् ओन् १.३.१० – १) इति ॥ ८.२६६ ॥


[^१८६]:
     M G add: yathā


[^१८५]:
     M G: -bhayārthāpratipādanād
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse sums up the preceding section and introduces the next.

Under 8.6, this head of dispute has been mentioned as ‘assault—corporal
and verbal’ (Hurt and Defamation) \[‘Hurt’ coming first\], in the
present context, the latter has been taken up first. This alteration of
the order of sequence is due to considerations of simplicity: In most
oases actual *physical* assault is preceded by *verbal* assault.
Further, a copulative compound (as ‘*daṇḍavācike*’ of verse 6) denotes
only mutual relationship, it lays no stress upon the order in which the
terms occur. So that both kinds of ‘assault ’—*physical* as well as
*verbal*—being equally meant, what sort of ‘alteration of order of
sequence’ is there in the present case? This has been folly explained by
the author of the *Mahābhāṣya* on Pāṇini, 1.8.10; and it is on the basis
of this theory that the two assaults have been mentioned by means of a
compound.—(206)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उपसंहारोपन्यासार्थः श्लोकः । ननु चैवं क्रमभेदः, "पारुष्ये दण्डवाचिके" इत्य् अभिधानाद् व्यवहारास्पन्दानुक्रण्याम् । [शब्दक्रम्]आत् तत्र पूर्वं दण्डपारुष्यग्रहणम् । अयं त्व् अर्थक्रमम् अश्रित्यात्र वाक्पारुष्यस्य पूर्वम् उपन्यासः । स च शब्दक्रमाद् गरीयान् । यतो नास्ति क्रमभेदः, अल्पाच्तरत्वाद् (?) [अस्मिन् द्वन्]द्वे ॥ ८.२६५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

266	Thus the law for deciding boundary (disputes) has been fully declared, I will next propound the (manner of) deciding (cases of) defamation.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/267_shatam_brAhmaNam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>267 शतम् ब्राह्मणम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

शतं ब्राह्मणम् आक्रुश्य  
क्षत्रियो दण्डम् अर्हति ।  
वैश्यो ऽप्य् अर्धशतं द्वे वा  
शूद्रस् तु वधम् अर्हति  ॥ ८.२६७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/267_shatam_brAhmaNam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

On abusing a Brāhmaṇa the Kṣatriya should be fined one hundred; and the Vaiśya one hundred and fifty; or two hundred; the Śūdra however deserves immolation.—(267)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

परुषवचनम् **आक्रोशः** । स च बहुधा- नृशंसाश्लीलभाषणान् मर्मणि तोदः,[^१८७] अभिशापः अकरणम् "हन्त[^१८८] वृषलो भूयाः[^१८९]", असता[^१९०] दुःखोत्पादनम्[^१९१] "कन्या ते गर्भ्णी" इति, पातकोपपातकैर् योजनम्[^१९२] इति । तत्र द्वयोर् ब्राह्मणाक्रोशे[^१९३] क्षत्रियवैश्ययोर्[^१९४] अयं दण्डः । अन्यत्र "पतनीये कृते क्षेपे दण्डो मध्यमसाहसः" (य्ध् २.२१४) इत्यादि स्मृत्यन्तरोक्तः । शूद्रस्य[^१९५] वधः ताडनजिह्वाछेदनमारणादिरूपः[^१९६] आक्रोशभेदाद् वेदितव्यः[^१९७] ॥ ८.२६७ ॥


[^१९७]:
     M G: ākrośabhedā veditavyāḥ


[^१९६]:
     M G: vadhatāḍane jihvāchedanamāraṇādi sarva


[^१९५]:
     M G: tasya; DK: tasya śūdrasya ca


[^१९४]:
     M G: kṣatriyāvaiśyayor


[^१९३]:
     M G J: brāhmaṇakrośe


[^१९२]:
     M G J: yājanam


[^१९१]:
     J: upanyasanaṃ


[^१९०]:
     M G: asatāṃ; J: asata


[^१८९]:
     M G J: vṛṣalabhūyāḥ


[^१८८]:
     M G J: akaraṇahantā


[^१८७]:
     M G: nṛśaṃsāślīlabhāṣaṇaṃ tena bhaṇito yo
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Abusing*’ is speaking harshly. In most cases it takes the following
forms:—(*a*) Causing pain by addressing foul words;—(*b*) cursing
without reason—‘O low-born one, may you suffer long’;—(*c*) giving false
information; *e.g*., ‘your unmarried daughter is pregnant’;—(*d*)
defamation, attributing to him serious or non-serious offences.

The punishment to be inflicted upon the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya for
abusing a Brāhmaṇa is as here laid down. In another *Smṛti*
(Yājñavalkya, 2.2.10) however we read—‘If a defamation refers to a
heinous offence, the penalty shall consist of the middle amercement;
while if it refer to a minor offence, it shall be the lowest
amercement.’

For the *Śūdra* ‘*immolation*,’—in the form of beating, cutting off the
tongue, actual death, and so forth, to be adjusted in accordance, with
the exact nature of the abuse.—(267)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 808), which adds that ‘*vadha*’
here means ‘cutting off the tongue’;—in *Parāśaramadhava* (Vyavahāra, p.
295);—in *Mitākṣarā*, (2.207),.where *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the following
notes:—‘*Adhyardha*,’ 150,—whether it should be 150 or 200 in any
particular case is to depend upon the lightness or gravity of the
offence,—‘*vadha*,’ beating and so forth.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 250), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Ākruśya*’ stands for the ‘middle’ kind of defamation—says
*Pārijāta*;—‘*adhyardham śatam*’, 150,—‘*dve vā*’, this alternative is
prescribed in view of the comparative gravity of the
defamation;—‘*vadha*’, beating, cutting off of the tongue and so forth.

It is quoted’ in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 99);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Vyavahāra, 44b);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 70), which explains
‘*adhyardham*’ as ‘one and a half’, and ‘*vadha*’ as ‘beating’, and says
that the punishment, in the case of the Vaiśya and the Śūdra also, is
for defamation;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 149a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.267-270)  
**

*Gautama* (12. 1, 8, 10-13).—‘A Śūdra who intentionally reviles
twice-born men, by criminal abuse, or criminally assaults them with
blows, shall be deprived of the limb with which he has offended. A
Kṣatriya shall he fined one hundred, if he abuses a Brāhmaṇa. A Vaiśya
who abuses a Brāhmaṇa shall pay one and a half (times as much as the
Kṣatriya). A Brāhmaṇa abusing a Kṣatriya shall pay 50; half of that for
abusing a Vaiśya; nothing for abusing a Śūdra.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.206.207).—‘The fine is half for reviling one lower than
one’s self, double, for reviling women and superior persons; thus shall
the fine he inflicted in accordance with the superiority or inferiority
of the castes concerned. If a person abuses another belonging to a
higher caste, he shall be fined double and treble (of 50 *Paṇas*); if
one abuses another belonging to a lower caste, the fine shall be reduced
by half of the afore-mentioned.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 104).—‘Among the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya, the Vaiśya,
the Śūdra and the Caṇḍāla,—if the succeeding reviles the preceding, the
fine shall be 3 *Paṇas*;—if the preceding reviles the succeeding, it
shall be 2 *Paṇas*.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.23, 33-35-38).—‘If the Śūdra uses abusive language, his
tongue shall be cut off;—for using insulting language, he shall be fined
a hundred *kārṣāpaṇas*;—for insulting a man by using bad language
regarding his mother, the highest amercement;—for abusing a man of his
own caste, he shall be fined twelve *Paṇas*; for abusing a man of a
lower caste, six *Paṇas*;—for insulting a member of the highest caste,
or of his own caste (at the same time), the same fine is ordained;—or if
he only returns his insult, a fine amounting to three *kārṣāpaṇas*.’

*Āpastamba* (2.27.14).—‘The tongue of a Śūdra who speaks evil of a
virtuous person, belonging to one of the first three castes, shall be
cut out.’

*Nārada* (15-16.15-17, 22, 25).—‘A Kṣatriya who reviles a Brāhmaṇa must
pay one hundred *Paṇas* as fine; a Vaiśya must pay one and a half
hundred, or two hundred; a Śūdra deserves corporal punishment. A
Brāhmaṇa shall he fined fifty *Paṇas* for calumniating a Kṣatriya; in
the case of a Vaiśya, the fine shall he half of fifty; in the case of a
Śūdra, it shall be twelve *Paṇas*. When a twice-born person offends
against a member of his own caste, he shall pay twelve *Paṇas* as fine.
When he utters calumnies which ought never to be uttered, the fine shall
be twice as high. A once-born man who insults members of a twice-born
caste with gross invectives, shall have his tongue cut out... With
whatever limb a low-caste man offends against a Brāhmaṇa, that very limb
of his shall be cut off; such shall be the atonement of his crime.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 251).—‘A Brāhmaṇa abusing a
Kṣatriya should be fined 100; 50 for abusing a Vaiśya and ‘25 for
abusing a Śūdra.’

*Bṛhaspāti* (20.6-11).—‘When persons equal in caste and qualities abuse
one another, the punishment ordained for them is thirteen *Paṇas* and a
half. For a Brāhmaṇa abusing a Kṣatriya, the fine shall be a
half-hundred; for abusing a Vaiśya, half of fifty; for abusing a Śūdra,
twelve and half. This punishment has been ordained for abusing a
virtuous Śūdra who has committed no wrong; no offence is imputable to a
Brāhmaṇa for abusing a Śūdra devoid of virtue. A Vaiśya shall he fined a
hundred *Paṇas* for reviling a Kṣatriya; a Kṣatriya reviling a Vaiśya
shall have to pay half of that amount as fine. In the case of a Kṣatriya
reviling a Śūdra, the fine shall be twenty *Paṇas*; in the case of a
Vaiśya, double that amount. The Śūdra shall be compelled to pay the fine
of the first amercement for abusing a Vaiśya; the middle amercement for
abusing a Kṣatriya 5 and the highest amercement for abusing a Brāhmaṇa.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vīvādaratnākara, p. 248).—‘For abusing a person of a
higher caste, the offender should propitiate him and pay a fine of three
*kārṣāpaṇas*;—on insulting a man of the same caste as oneself the fine
is twelve *kārṣāpanas*; and twenty-four, for insulting a person of
superior qualifications.’

*Hārīta* (Do., p. 251).—‘For a low-caste man abusing one of a higher
caste, the fine is eight *Purāṇas* (Purāṇa being equal to 32 silver
*kṛṣṇalas*).’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अवचनीयाद् आक्रोशाद् ऋते अन्यस्मिन्न् आक्रोशे एते यथार्हं दण्डवि[धयः ब्राःमणाक्रोशने यो] वैश्यस्य दण्ड उक्तः ततो ऽर्धं क्षत्रियम् आक्रुश्य वैश्यस्य न्यायाद् आप्नोति दण्डम् । शूद्रस्य त्व् एकजातिदण्डः "एकजातिर् द्विजातिम्" इति द्विजातिमात्र्[आक्रोशने तद्विधानात् ॥ ८.२६६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

267	A Kshatriya, having defamed a Brahmana, shall be fined one hundred (panas); a Vaisya one hundred and fifty or two hundred; a Sudra shall suffer corporal punishment.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/268_panchAshad_brAhmaNo.md">
<details open><summary><h3>268 पञ्चाशद् ब्राह्मणो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पञ्चाशद् ब्राह्मणो दण्ड्यः  
क्षत्रियस्याऽभिशंसने ।  
वैश्ये स्याद् अर्धपञ्चाशच्  
छूद्रे द्वादशको दमः  ॥ ८.२६८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/268_panchAshad_brAhmaNo.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For abusing a Kṣatriya, the Brāhmaṇa should be fined fifty; and in the case of a Vaiśya, the fine shall be twenty-five; and in that of a Shudra, twelve.—(268)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अभिशंसनं** सर्वप्रकार आक्रोशः, पतनीयाद् अन्यः, तत्र दण्डान्तरविधानात् । निमित्तसप्तमी चैषा । **वैश्य** इति विषयसप्तमी[^१९८] । ब्राह्मणस्याक्रोष्टुर् आक्रुश्यमानस्य च दण्ड उक्तः । क्षत्रियादीनां त्व् इतरेतरं स्मृत्यन्तरम् अन्वेषणीयम् । तथा च गौतमः- "ब्राह्मणराजन्यवत् क्षत्रियवैश्यौ" (ग्ध् १२.१४) । परस्पराक्रोशे क्षत्रियश् चेद् वैश्यम् आक्रोशेत् पञ्चाशतं दण्ड्यः, वैश्यः क्षत्रियं शतम् । एवं क्षत्रियः शूद्रम् आक्रोशेत् पञ्चविंशतिर् दण्ड्यः, वैश्यः पञ्चाशतम् । शूद्रस्य तु तदाक्रोशे गुणापेक्षिको दण्डो वक्ष्यते ॥ ८.२६८ ॥


[^१९८]:
     J: daṇḍaviṣayasaptamī
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Abusing*’ here stands for all sorts of defamation, except the
attributing of grievous offences, for which latter other penalties are
laid down. The locative ending indicates *occasion*.

The locative in ‘*vaiśye*’ denotes the object.

The punishment for the cases where the Brāhmaṇa is the abuser or the
abused has been laid down; for finding out that for the cases of abuse
among the Kṣatriya and other castes themselves, we have to look into
other *Smṛtis*. Says Gautama for instance—‘Whenever there is abusing
between the *Brāhmaṇa* and the *Kṣatriya*, or between the *Kṣatriya* and
the *Vaiśya*, where the *Kṣatriya* abuses a *Vaiśya* he shall be fined
fifty; and where the *Vaiśya* abuses a *Kṣatrya*, the fine shall be one
hundred; similarly for abusing a *Śūdra* the *Kṣatriya* shall be fined
twenty-five, and the *Vaiśya* fifty.’

In the case of the *Śūdra* abusing a *Śūdra*, the punishment shall
depend upon their qualifications, as is going to be detailed below
(under 287 *et seq*.).—(268)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2. 207), to the effect that the
Brāhmaṇa is to be fined 50 for insulting a Kṣatriya, 25 for insulting a
Vaiśya and 12½ for insulting a Śūdra;—in *Aparārka* (p. 808), to the
same effect, adding that so many *paṇas* are meant;—and in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 151), which adds that ‘*abhiśaṃsana*’ means
‘defaming,’ ‘insulting.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.267-270)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.267].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

गदव्याख्यातः श्लोकः । अत्रापि न्यायप्रकॢप्त्या क्षत्रियो वैश्यम् आक्रु[श्य ब्राह्मणदण्डाद् द्विगुणं] दण्ड्यः स्यात्, वैश्यस् तु शूद्रम् आक्रुश्य ब्राह्मणदण्डात् त्रिगुणं दद्यात् ॥ ८.२६७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

268	A Brahmana shall be fined fifty (panas) for defaming a Kshatriya; in (the case of) a Vaisya the fine shall be twenty-five (panas); in (the case of) a Sudra twelve.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/269_samavarNe_dvijAtInAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>269 समवर्णे द्विजातीनाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

समवर्णे द्विजातीनां  
द्वादशैव व्यतिक्रमे ।  
वादेष्व् अवचनीयेषु  
तद् एव द्विगुणं भवेत्  ॥ ८.२६९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/269_samavarNe_dvijAtInAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Among twice-born men, when there is offence against an equal, the fine is twelve only in the case of unutterable abuses, it shall be double.—(269)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**द्विजाति**ग्रहणम् अतन्त्रम्[^१९९] । **समवर्णे** द्वादश[^२००] **व्यतिक्रमे** प्रस्पराक्रोशे **दण्डः** । साम्यं[^२०१] च जातिवित्तबन्धुवयःकर्मविद्याभिः, विशेषानुपदेशात् । तत्र समानजातीये वित्ताधिके द्विगुणं तस्मिन्न् एव बन्धुत्वाधिके त्रिगुणं यावत् सर्वगुणे निर्गुणस्य[^२०२] षड्गुणम् । **वादा** आक्रोषा **अवचनीया** अत्यन्तनृशंसा मातृभगिनीभार्यादिगताः । **तद् एव द्विगुणं** दण्डपरिमाणम् । नपुंसकलिङ्गात् सर्वशेषो ऽयं न समवर्णविषय एव । अथ वा **तद् एव** शतम् इति योजना, लिङ्गसामर्थ्याच् छतस्य च प्रथमश्लोके श्रुतत्वात् । अतो **ऽवचनीयेषु** समवर्णेष्व् अपि द्विशतो दमः । लिङ्गोपपत्त्यर्थं परिमाणपदम् अश्रुतम् अध्याहर्तव्यम् । शते तु व्यवहितकल्पना ज्यायसी ॥ ८.२६९ ॥


[^२०२]:
     M G: sarvaguṇānirguṇasya; DK (1: 1775): sarvaguṇātiguṇasya


[^२०१]:
     M G: sa


[^२००]:
     J places dvādaśa before daṇḍaḥ


[^१९९]:
     M G: atra
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If a once-born person insults a twice-born one with gross abuse, he
should suffer the cutting off of his tongue; as he is of low
origin.—(270)

‘*Once-born person*’—the *Śūdra*; if he ‘*insults*’—abuses—the higher
castes—‘*with gross abuse*’—harsh words attributing heinous
offences,—suffers ‘*the cutting off of the tongue*.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 149), which adds the
following notes:—No special stress is meant to be laid here on the
mention of the ‘twice-born’ (what is stated being equally applicable to
all castes);—‘*vyatikrame*’ means *defamation*, other than the
divulging, of *a secret*, which latter is what is spoken of by the
phrase ‘*vāde avacanīye*.’

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 49a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.267-270)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.267].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

[ब्राह्मणस्य] ब्राह्मण (?) । एवम् इतरयोर् अपि । शूद्रे ऽपि कार्यसामान्याद् एतद् एव स्यात् । एवं च द्विजातिग्रहणस्याविवक्षितत्वाद् एकजातिप्रदर्शनार्थम् अप्य् एतद् अत्र स्यात् । **अवचनीयेषु** तु वादेषु "शतं ब्राह्मणम् आक्रुष्य" इति एवमादिषु यद् यद् उक्तं तत् तद् द्विगुणं तत्र स्यात् ॥ ८.२६८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

269	For offences of twice-born men against those of equal caste (varna, the fine shall be) also twelve (panas); for speeches which ought not to be uttered, that (and every fine shall be) double.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/270_ekajAtir_dvijAtIMs.md">
<details open><summary><h3>270 एकजातिर् द्विजातींस् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एकजातिर् द्विजातींस् तु  
वाचा दारुणया क्षिपन् ।  
जिह्वायाः प्राप्नुयाच् छेदं  
जघन्य-प्रभवो हि सः  ॥ ८.२७० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/270_ekajAtir_dvijAtIMs.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a once-born person insults a twice-born one with gross abuse, he should suffer the cutting off of his tongue; as he is of low origin.—(270)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**एकजातिः** शूद्रः । स त्रैवर्णिकान् **क्षिपन्न्** आक्रोशन् **दारुणया** पातकादियोगिन्या **वाचा** नृशंसादिरूपया **जिह्वाछेदं** लभते । **जघन्यप्रभव** इति पादाभ्यां ब्राह्मण उत्पन्न इति हेत्वभिधानं प्रतिलोमानाम् अपि ग्रहणार्थम् । ते ऽपि जघन्यप्रभवा एव "नास्ति पञ्चमः" (म्ध् १०.४) इति वर्णान्तरनिषेधात् ॥ ८.२७० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Once-born person*’—the *Śūdra*; if he ‘*insults*’—abuses—the higher
castes—‘*with gross abuse*’—harsh words attributing heinous
offences,—suffers ‘*the cutting off of the tongue*.’

‘*He is of low origin*’—being born out of the feet of Brahmā. This is
the reason given for the special penalty; and it serves also to indicate
the same punishment for persons of the reverse cross-breed also; since
these latter also are ‘of low origin’; specially in view of the
declaration that ‘there is no fifth caste.’—(270)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 809);—and in *Vivādaratnākara*
(p. 153), which adds the following notes:—‘*Ekajāti*’, ‘once-born’, is
the *Śūdra*, since he has no *upanayana* (which is the *second
birth*),—‘*dāruṇayā*’, heartrending, insinuating a heinous crime and so,
forth,—‘*jaghanyaprabhavaḥ*’, the Śruti having described the *Śūdra* as
born from the feet. This implies that in the case of the mixed castes
insulting the twice-born also, the same penalty is meant, since these
also are ‘low-born.’

*Bālambhaṭṭī* (on 1.107) remarks that, inasmuch as in verse 177 the
cutting of the tongue is excluded in the case of the Śūdra insulting the
Vaiśya, what is said in the present verse must be restricted to the
Śūdra insulting either a Brāhmaṇa or a Kṣatriya.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.267-270)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.267].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ब्राह्मणाक्रोशे वध उक्तः शूद्रस्य । यतो ऽयं क्षत्रियवैश्याक्रोशे तस्य दण्डविधिर् ज्ञेयः । यतः जिह्वाच्छेदश् चाप्राणोपरोधी सामार्थ्याद् अस्य विज्ञायते ॥ ८.२६९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

270	A once-born man (a Sudra), who insults a twice-born man with gross invective, shall have his tongue cut out; for he is of low origin.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/271_nAma-jAtigrahan_tv.md">
<details open><summary><h3>271 नाम-जातिग्रहन् त्व् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

नाम-जातिग्रहं त्व् एषाम्  
अभिद्रोहेण कुर्वतः ।  
निक्षेप्यो ऽयोमयः शङ्कुर्  
ज्वलन्न् आस्ये दशाङ्गुलः  ॥ ८.२७१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/271_nAma-jAtigrahan_tv.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If he mentions the name and caste of these men with scorn, a burning iron nail ten inches long shall be thrust into his mouth.—(271)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अभिद्रोह** आक्रोशः कुत्साबुद्धिः- "ब्राह्मणक, त्वं मा मया स्पर्धिष्टाः" । एवम् अन्यद् अपि योज्यम् । ग्रहणं **ग्रहः** । निरुपपदं नाम गृह्णाति कुत्साप्रत्यययोगेन वा- "देवदत्तक" इति । **अभिद्रोहेण** क्रोधेन, अभिद्रोहः क्रोधः गर्हा[^२०३] क्षेपः[^२०४] । न पणयेन । **निःक्षेप्यः** प्रक्षेप्यः । **शङ्कुः** कीलकः । **ज्वलन्न् अग्निना** दीप्यमानः, **अयोमयो** लोहमयः ॥ ८.२७१ ॥


[^२०४]:
     J omits: garhā kṣepaḥ


[^२०३]:
     M G: garbhaḥ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Scorn*’—is *disrespect*, a feeling of disdain.

The words being in some such form as—‘O wretched Brāhmaṇa, do not touch
me’; and so forth.

Similarly with the *name* also.

‘*Mention*’ means *uttering* the names without the proper honorific
title, or accompanied by an affix signifying ‘disdain’—(‘Oh you
Devadattaka’).

Or ‘*abhidroha*’ may mean *anger*.

‘*Should be thrust*’—thrown in.

‘*Nail*’—wedge.

‘*Burning*’—flaming with fire.

‘*Iron*’—made of iron.—(271)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 153), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Abhidroheṇa*’, in an extremely insulting
manner,—‘*ayomayaḥ*’, made of iron,—‘*śaṅkuḥ*’, nail.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 809), which says that this is meant for
very frequently repeated offence.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.25).—‘If a low-born man revilingly mentions the name or caste
of a superior,—an iron pin, ten inches long, shall be thrust into his
mouth.’

*Nārada* (15-16.23).—‘If the Śūdra refers to the name or caste of a
superior caste in terms indicating contempt, an iron-rod, ten inches
long, shall be thrust red-hot into his mouth.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अवचनीयैर् अभिद्रोहेणाक्रोशतः शूद्रस्यानेन प्रकारेण वध उपदिश्यते ॥ ८.२७० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

271	If he mentions the names and castes (gati) of the (twice-born) with contumely, an iron nail, ten fingers long, shall be thrust red-hot into his mouth.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/272_dharmopadeshan_darpeNa.md">
<details open><summary><h3>272 धर्मोपदेशन् दर्पेण ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

धर्मोपदेशं दर्पेण  
विप्राणाम् अस्य कुर्वतः ।  
तप्तम् आसेचयेत् तैलं  
वक्त्रे श्रोत्रे च पार्थिवः [मेधातिथिपाठः - श्रौत्रे]  ॥ ८.२७२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/272_dharmopadeshan_darpeNa.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If through arrogance, he teaches brāhmaṇas their duty, the king shall pour heated oil into his mouth and ears.—(272)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"अयं ते स्वधर्मः," "इयं वात्रेतिकर्तव्यता," "मैवं कार्षीः," "छान्दसो ऽसि" इत्य् एवमादिव्याकरणलेशज्ञतया[^२०५] दुन्दुकत्वेन दर्पवन्तः शूद्रा उपदिशन्ति । तेषम् एष दण्डः । यस् तु प्रणयात् ब्राह्मणापाश्रयाद् एव व्युत्पन्नो विस्मृतं कथंचिद् देशकालविभागं स्मारयेत्- "पूर्वाह्णकालं नातिक्रामय,[^२०६] क्रियतां दैवं कर्म, देवांस् तर्पयोपवीति भव, मा प्राचीनावीतं कार्षीः" इति न दोषः । **तप्तम्** अग्निसंबन्धात् पीडाकरम् । **आसेचयेत्** क्षारयेत् । 


[^२०६]:
     M G: nātikrāmayati; J: nātikrāmayeti


[^२०५]:
     M G J: -jñānatayā

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;युक्तं वक्त्रे, मुखेनोपदेशकत्वात् । श्रोत्रस्य को ऽपराधः । 

<u>प्राग्</u> असत्तर्कादिश्रवणम् ॥ ८.२७२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Sometimes *Śūdras*, ‘through arrogance’ due to a slight knowledge of
grammar, address to Brāhmaṇas such advice as—‘this is your duty,’—‘such
is the procedure of this rite’—‘do not do it in this manner, you who are
learned in the Veda.’ And the text lays down the penalty for such
*Śūdras*. If however a *Śūdra* has learnt things through his association
with Brāhmaṇas, and points out lapses as to proper time and place due to
forgetting the details, in a friendly manner, with such words as—‘Do not
please omit the morning time,’ ‘fulfil your duties towards the gods,’
‘satisfy the gods,’ ‘wear the cloth over your right shoulder, and not
the reverse,’—then there is nothing wrong in this.

‘*Heated*’—put into fire and hence painful.

‘*Pour*’—make it flow.

“It is right that it should be poured into his mouth, since it is with
the mouth that he offers the advice. But what is the fault of the ears?”

Their fault lies in having listened to misguided reasonings (which make
him think himself qualified for offering the advice).—(272)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Cf*. 11.115.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 809), which adds that ‘*asya*’
stands for the *Śūdra*;—and in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 254).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5-24).—‘If a low-born man, through arrogance, give instruction
to a member of the highest caste, concerning his duty, let the King
order hot oil to be poured into his mouth.’

*Nārada* (15-16.24).—‘If the Śūdra is insolent enough to give lessons to
Brāhmaṇas regarding their duty, the King shall order hot oil to he
poured into his mouth and ears.’

*Bṛhaspati* (20.12).—‘A Śūdra teaching the precepts of religion, or
uttering the words of the Veda, or insulting a Brāhmaṇa, shall he
punished by cutting out his tongue.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

धर्मोपदेशसामर्थ्यं चैतच्छूद्रस्यार्थाद् विज्ञेयम् । एवं च सति नेदं लिङ्गं शूद्रस्य शास्त्रप्राप्तेर् भवति ॥ ८.२७१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

272	If he arrogantly teaches Brahmanas their duty, the king shall cause hot oil to be poured into his mouth and into his ears.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/273_shrutan_desham.md">
<details open><summary><h3>273 श्रुतन् देशम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

श्रुतं देशं च जातिं च  
कर्म शरीरम् एव च ।  
वितथेन ब्रुवन् दर्पाद्  
दाप्यः स्याद् द्विशतं दमम्  ॥ ८.२७३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/273_shrutan_desham.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who, through arrogance, speaks falsely regarding the learning, the habitat, the caste, the occupation, or the bodily details (of another person), should be made to pay a pine of two hundred.—(273)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सत्ये च **श्रुते** "नैतद् अनेन सम्यक् श्रुतम्" इत्य् आह । **श्रुतम्** एव वाक्षिपति "नैतत् संस्कारकं[^२०७] यद् अनेन श्रुतम्" इति । ब्रह्मावर्तीयम् अभिजनाभिमानिनम् "बाह्यको ऽयम्" इत्य् आह । एवं **जात्**इब्राह्मणं[^२०८] "क्षत्रियो ऽयम्" इत्य् आह, क्षत्रियं वा हेलया "ब्राह्मण" इति । **कर्म** ब्राह्मचारिणम्[^२०९] "स्नातक" इति । शरीरावयवः **शारीरे** ऽव्यङ्गं "दुश्चर्मा" इति । **वितथेन** वितथम् अनृतम् । "प्रकृत्यादिभ्यः" (कात् ओन् पाण् २.३.१८) इति तृतीया । अथ वा, अधर्मो[^२१०] वैतथ्यम्, तस्य वाच्यं प्रति कारणता युक्तैव । स्वगुणमदात् परावज्ञानं **दर्पः** । अज्ञानात् परिहासतो वा न दोषः । 


[^२१०]:
     M G DK: atha vāyaṃ dharmo


[^२०९]:
     M G DK (1: 1776) omit: brāhmacāriṇam


[^२०८]:
     J: jātyābrāhmaṇaṃ


[^२०७]:
     J: samyak

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कस्य पुनर् अयं दण्डः । 

<u>सर्वेषाम्</u> इति ब्रूमः । शूद्राधिकाराच् छूद्रस्यैवेति परे, द्विजातिविषये वैतथ्ये ॥ ८.२७३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When, as a matter of fact, a man is really learned, one may say ‘this
has not been properly learnt by him’; or he may defame his learning by
declaring—‘what he has learnt is not right.’

With regard to one who regards himself as an inhabitant of Brahmāvarta,
he may say ‘he is a foreigner.’

With regard to a real Brāhmaṇa, he may say ‘he is a Kṣatriya’; or
through friendship he may call a *Kṣatriya*, ‘*Brāhmaṇa*.’

‘*Occupation*’;—the ‘student’ may be called ‘one who has finished his
studies.’

In regard to one’s ‘*bodily details*, ho may say ‘he is suffering from
skin diseases,’ when, in reality, the man has no defects at all.

‘*Falsely* ’;—‘*false*’ is what is a lie. The instrumental ending being
used in accordance with Pāṇini’s rule ‘*Prakṛtyādibhya upasaṅkhyānam*.’

Or ‘*falsity*’ may stand for *unrighteousness*; and it is only right
that *unrighteousness* should be regarded as instrumental in defaming
other persons.

‘*Through arrogance*’;—‘*arrogance*’ stands for *disregard for others*.
So that if the assertions in question are made through ignorance, or in
joke, there is no harm.

“For whom is this penalty laid down?”

We say—for all castes. Others however hold that, since the context
pertains to the *Śūdra*, it must be regarded as meant for the *Śūdra*
falsely defaming a twice-born person.—(273)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Cf*. 2.19-11.

‘*Karma śārīram*’—‘With reference to occupation *and* to the body’
(Medhātithi);—‘bodily sacraments’ (Kullūka and others).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 254), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Karma*,’ austerities and the like;—‘*śārīram*,’ limbs
of the body,—‘*vitathena*,’ falsely,—the meaning being that if one,
through arrogance, spreads false reports regarding the learning,
country, caste, austerities, and limbs of another, he shall be fined
200. The Instrumental ending in ‘*Vitathena*’ is in accordance with
*Pāṇini’s Sūtra* ‘*Prakṛtyādibhya upasaṅkhyānam*’;—‘*Śruta*’, ‘learning’
and the rest are mentioned by way of illustration of the false reports;
*e*.*g*.—‘This man has not learnt the Veda,’ ‘he is not an inhabitant of
Āryāvarta,’ ‘he is not a Brāhmaṇa,’ ‘he has performed no austerity at
all,’ ‘his skin is not free from disease’ and so forth.—‘*Darpa*’ stands
for the high opinion that one has in regard to his own qualifications
and consequently the low opinion that he has with regard to other
persons.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5-26).—‘He who falsely denies the sacred knowledge, the country
or the caste, of a member of the higher castes, or who says that his
religious duties have not been fulfilled by him,—shall be find 200
*Paṇas*.’

*Bṛhaspati* (20-14).—‘He who reviles a person’s native country or other
belongings of his, shall be fined 12 *Paṇas*. He who, through arrogance,
imputes an offence to him, shall be compelled to pay the fine of the
first degree.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 103).—‘For reviling a man in regard to his body,
nature, learning, livelihood and country,—the punishment is a fine of 3
*Paṇas*.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सत्य् अपि शूद्रप्रकरणे सर्वेषां ब्राह्मणादीनाम् अयं विधिर् ज्ञेयः सामर्थात् ॥ ८.२७२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

273	He who through arrogance makes false statements regarding the learning (of a caste-fellow), his country, his caste (gati), or the rites by which his body was sanctified, shall be compelled to pay a fine of two hundred (panas).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/274_kANaM_vApy.md">
<details open><summary><h3>274 काणं वाप्य् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

काणं वाप्य् अथ वा खञ्जम्  
अन्यं वापि तथाविधम् ।  
तथ्येनाऽपि ब्रुवन् दाप्यो  
दण्डं कार्षापणावरम्  ॥ ८.२७४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/274_kANaM_vApy.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a man, even truly, calls another ‘one-eyed’ or ‘lame’ or something else like it,—he should be made to pay a fine of at least one ‘Kārṣāpaṇa.’—(274)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

एकेनाक्ष्णा विकलः **काणः** । **खञ्जः** पादविकलः । **तथाविधं** कुणिं चिपट,[^२११] **तथ्येन** नासत्येन[^२१२] **अपि**शब्दाद् वितथेन, अकाणे काणे च[^२१३] काण इत्य् उक्ते **कार्षापणावरो दण्डः** । अत्यन्ताल्पो यदि दण्डः कथंचिद् अनुग्राह्यतया, तदा कार्षापणो ऽवरो[^२१४] दण्डः । अन्यथा द्वौ त्रयः पञ्च वा पुरुषविशेषापेक्षयापि दण्ड्यः शूद्रः, सर्वे वा पूर्ववत् ॥ ८.२७४ ॥


[^२१४]:
     J omits: 'varo


[^२१३]:
     J omits: kāṇe ca


[^२१२]:
     J: asatyena


[^२११]:
     M G: ciṭapaṃ; J: cipiṭanāsaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*One-eyed*’—he who is deprived of one of his eyes.

‘*Lame*’—who is without one leg.

‘*Something else like this*’—*e.g*., a cripple, flat-nosed and so forth.

‘*Even truly*’;—the term ‘*even*’ implies the false defamation also,
*i.e*., when one who is not one-eyed is called so.

The fine in this case shall be ‘*at least one Kārṣāpaṇa*’—*i.e*., if,
through mercy, the lowest fine be meant to be imposed, a *Kārṣāpaṇa*
should be the lowest amount of it. Otherwise, the flue should be two,
three, four or five *Kārṣāpaṇas*, according to the character of the
accused.

This rule may be taken, as before, as referring to either all men, or to
the *Śūdra* only.—(274)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.204), which notes that this rule
refers to a case where the defamer is a very wicked person; and
*Bālambhaṭṭī* has the following notes:—‘*Tathyena*,’ even in
truth,—‘*kārṣāpaṇāvaram*,’ at least one *kārṣāpaṇa*, never less than
that; this refers to cases where a wicked and ill-behaved person insults
a caste-fellow.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 806), which adds that this refers to a
case where the insulter is a man with very superior qualifications, or
where the motive of insulting is very insignificant.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 247), which explains
‘*kārṣāpaṇāvaram*’ as ‘that than which one *kārṣā* *paṇa* is lower,’
*i.e*., ‘two *kārṣāpaṇas*—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 295),
which adds that this refers to an extremely wicked person;—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, 44b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
150a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 103).—‘If one reviles a man as one-eyed, lame and so
forth when he is really so,—the fine is 3 *Paṇas*; if he is not so, it
is 6 *Paṇas*.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.27).—‘If a man is blind, with one eye, or lame, or defective
in any similar way,—and another calls him so,—the latter shall be fined
2 *kārṣāpāṇas*, though he speaks the truth.’

*Yājñavalkya*( 2-204).—‘If a man reviles another—either falsely or truly
or ironically—in regard to defective limbs or sense-organs or
diseases,—he shall he fined twelve and a half *Paṇas*.’

*Nārada* (15-16.18).—(Same as Manu.)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

कार्षापणावरत्वं चापराधं परिज्ञाय स्थाप्यम् । तथा च विहितदण्डापवादः शास्त्रोक्त एवानुबन्धं परिज्ञायेत्य् एवमादि ॥ ८.२७३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

274	He who even in accordance with the true facts (contemptuously) calls another man one-eyed, lame, or the like (names), shall be fined at least one karshapana.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/275_mAtaram_pitaram.md">
<details open><summary><h3>275 मातरम् पितरम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

मातरं पितरं जायां  
भ्रातरं तनयं गुरुम् ।  
आक्षारयञ् शतं दाप्यः  
पन्थानं चाऽददद् गुरोः  ॥ ८.२७५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/275_mAtaram_pitaram.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who alienates the mother, the father, the wife, the brother, the child or the preceptor, should be made to pay a hundred; as also one who does not give the way to his preceptor.—(276)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**आक्षारणं** भेदनं द्वेषजननम् अनृतेन । "एषा ते माता न स्नेहवती द्वितीये पुत्रे ऽत्यन्ततृष्णावती कनकमयम् अङ्गुलीयकं रहसि तस्मै दत्तवती" इत्य् एवमाद्य् उक्त्वा भेदयति । एवं पितापुत्रौ जायापती भ्रातॄन् गुरुशिष्यौ । **तनय**ग्रहणं द्वितीयसंबन्धिप्रदर्शनार्थम् । अन्यथा **मातरम्** इत्य् उक्ते मातरं पुत्राद् भिन्दतो[^२१६] दण्डः स्यान् न पुत्रं मातुः । यद्य् अपि भेदनम् उभयाधिष्ठानं तथापि यन्मुखेन क्रियते स एव भेदयितव्य इति व्यवहारः । तत्रासति **तनय**ग्रहणे प्रदर्शनार्थे यदैव मातरम् आह "नैष ते पुत्रो ऽभक्तो दुःशीलश् च" इत्येवमादिना मातरम् आक्षारयति तत्रैव स्यान् न तु[^२१७] पुत्रं यथा दर्शितम् । 


[^२१७]:
     M G DK omit: tu


[^२१६]:
     M G: bhidyato

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु चित्तकदर्थनोत्पादनम् **आक्षारणम्** आहुः । "प्रवक्ष्यामि धनं श्रुतं वार्जयितुं तीर्थाद्य् उपसेवितुम्" तत्प्रवासशङ्कया च मानसी तृष्णया पीडा भवतीति, तथा न कर्तव्यम् । 

यावद् **गुरवस्** ते जीवेयुस् तावन् नान्यं समाचरेन् न तैर् अननुज्ञात इति च । यत् तु विद्वेषणादिना चित्ते खेदोत्पादनं तत्र शता न मुच्यते, "प्रतिरोद्धा गुरोः" (म्ध् ३.१४३) इति महत्वाद् दोषस्य ।   

**जायाया** अनुकूलायाः पुत्रवत्याः "करोत्य् अन्यं विवाहम्" इत्य् एतद् **आक्षारणम्** । एवं गुणवतः पुत्रस्याकारणे ऽन्यकरणम् । **गुरोः** सर्वप्रकारं **पन्थानम्** अत्यजतः शतं दण्डः ॥ ८.२७५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Alienating*’ means *estranging* (sowing dissension), by false
insinuations; *e.g*., when one tries to sow dissension by making such
assertions as—‘This mother of yours has no love for you, she has a great
hankering after her other son, and has secretly given him a golden
ring.’ Similarly when he sows dissension between the father and son, or
between the husband and wife, or between brothers, or between the
preceptor and disciple.

The term ‘*child*’ has been mentioned with a view to indicate the other
member in the dissension. If this were not added, the punishment would
apply only to one who would alienate the ‘mother’ from her son,—and not
to one who would alienate the ‘son’ from his mother; though ‘alienation’
is always between two parties, yet that party is spoken of as being
‘alienated’ through whom the estrangement is attempted. Under the
circumstances, if the ‘child’ were not mentioned, the punishment would
apply only to one who would ‘alienate the *mother*’ by saying—‘this son
of yours is not devoted to you, and is ill-behaved,’—and not to one who
would ‘alienate’ the *son*, in the manner described before.

Others have explained the word ‘*ākṣārayan*’ as *causing mental
suffering*; by making such statements as—‘I am going away from the
country for the purpose of acquiring learning or wealth,’—when the fear
of the going away of the son causes pain to the father and others; and
hence this should not be done.

As regards the ‘preceptor,’ so long as he is alive, one should not go
over to another, specially so long as he does not permit him to do so.
In a case where the disciple causes mental suffering to his preceptor,
by disrespect and such acts,—the man cannot escape by paying the fine of
a hundred only; as ‘disregarding of the preceptor’ has been held to be a
very serious offence.

The ‘*alienating*’ of the loving wife with children is attempted by
telling her that her husband is going to marry another woman. Similarly
that of the son with excellent qualities, by representing him to be
otherwise.

If in any way, one does not give the way to his preceptor, bis fine
shall be one hundred.—(275)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Ākṣārayan*’—‘Defames, by causing dissension’ (Medhātithi),—‘accuses of
a heinous crime’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda),—‘accuses of
incest’ (Nārāyaṇa),—‘makes them angry’ (Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.204), which (reading ‘*Śvaśuram*’
for ‘*tanayam*’) adds that this refers to cases where the wife is
*innocent* of what is said against her, and. where the mother and the
rest are even *guilty* of what is alleged. *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the
following notes:—‘*Ākṣārayan*,’ defaming,—‘*adadat*,’ not leaving in
favour of;—what *Mitākṣarā* says in regard to this rule answers the
objection taken against it by Kullūka, that some explanation should be
found for the same penalty being prescribed for insulting all the
persons mentioned here;—Medhātithi, on the other hand, adopting the
reading ‘*tanayam*,’ has explained ‘*ākṣārayan*’ as *causing dissension*
among the persons mentioned.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 149b), which explains
‘*bhrātaram*’ as ‘elder brother,’ and adds that this refers to cases
where the elders have done some mischief, and the wife has done nothing
wrong;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 295), which adds the same
note as *Mitākṣarā*;—and in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 99), which adds that
the ‘brother meant here is the *elder* one, since he is mentioned along
with the father and the rest,’ and adds that *Mitākṣarā* and other works
have declared that this refers to the wife only when she is innocent,
and to the mother and others even when they are guilty.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 250), which reads ‘*tanayam*,’ and
explains ‘*ākṣārayan*’ as ‘subjecting’ to insult—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Vyavahāra, 44b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.28)—‘He shall he fined a hundred *Kārṣāpaṇaṣ* for defaming a
*Guru*.’

*Bṛhaspati* (20.13).—‘One reviling the sister or other relations shall
pay a fine amounting to 50 *Paṇas*.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 250).—‘If one reviles the King’s
officers or elders or Brāhmaṇas, he shall be chided or beaten or
besmeared with cowdung, or made to ride a donkey, or fined to such an
extent as would cure him of his arrogance.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अत्र श्लोके जायातनयग्रहणम् अर्थवादर्थम् । कथं कृत्वा । भार्यापुत्रयोर् एव तावद् आक्षारणे ऽयम् अस्य दण्डो भवितुम् अर्हति, प्राग् एव मात्रादीनाम् । यस्मान् मात्रादिभ्[इर् न्यू]नत्वं भार्यापुत्रयोः । एतस्मात् सामर्थ्याद् इदम् एवं व्याकरणीयम् । भ्राता च यदि कनीयान् तत एषैवात्र (?) व्याख्या । अत तु ज्येष्ठस्य ग्रहणम्, ततो गुरुत्वाद् अस्य विध्यर्थतैव न्याय्या । एवं च सति गुरुग्रहणं विद्यागुरुप्रभृतीनाम् अवरोधार्थम् । गुरुग्रहणाद् एव च मात्रादिग्रहणे सिद्धे पृथग् उपदेशस् तेषाम् आदरार्थो विज्ञेयः । इदं चान्यद् अर्थान्तरविषयं वाक्यान्तरं समानदण्डत्वाद् अस्मिन्न् एवावधाव् उच्यते । **पन्थानं चाददद् गुरोः** सर्वप्रकारस्यानाक्षारयन्न् अप्य् अयम् एव दण्ड एकः कार्यः स्यात् । एतस्माद् एव च गुरुग्रहणात् पूर्वत्र भार्यापुत्रग्रहणम् अर्थवादार्थं सुतरां विज्ञायते । येन समानदण्ड एव व्यभिचारान्तरौ श्रूयेते । आक्षारणं च प्रतरद्वाक्पारुष्यविशेष आक्रोशादिः । अन्यस् त्व् आह- अनृतेन भेदनम् आक्षारणम् । अनृताभिशंसनं त्व् अपरः । तत् त्व् एतद् उभयं प्रकरणविरोधाद् विचारणीयं युक्तायुक्तत्वेन ॥ ८.२७४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

275	He who defames his mother, his father, his wife, his brother, his son, or his teacher, and he who gives not the way to his preceptor, shall be compelled to pay one hundred (panas).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/276_brAhmaNa-xatriyAbhyAn_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>276 ब्राह्मण-क्षत्रियाभ्यान् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ब्राह्मण-क्षत्रियाभ्यां तु  
दण्डः कार्यो विजानता ।  
ब्राह्मणे साहसः पूर्वः  
क्षत्रिये त्व् एव मध्यमः  ॥ ८.२७६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/276_brAhmaNa-xatriyAbhyAn_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The discerning king shall inflict this punishment upon the Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣatriya: the brāhmaṇa shall be fined the lowest amercement and the kṣatriya the middlemost—(276)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियाभ्यां** परस्पराक्रोशे कृते तयोर् अयं **दण्ड** इत्य् एवम् अध्याहारेण योजना । तादर्थ्ये चतुर्थी वा । तद्विनयाय दण्डः कर्तव्यः । पातकस्याक्रोशे कृते ऽयं दण्डो दुःखोत्पादनरूपे ॥ ८.२७६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The construction of this passage is elliptical:—‘In the case of mutual
abuse between the Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣatriya, this shall be the
punishment.’

Or, the Dative (in ‘*brāhmāṇakṣatriyābhyāṃ*’) may be taken as denoting
*purpose*; the sense being—‘for the purpose of keeping in check the
Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣatriya.’

The punishment here prescribed is to be inflicted when some grievous
offence is attributed, and causes pain—(276)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 255), which adds the
following explanations:—In a case where a Brāhmaṇa and a Kṣatriya have
insulted one another, the ‘first amercement’ on the latter.—According to
*Bālambhaṭṭī* (2.207) the rule refers to cases where the defamation is
in regard to a heinous offence;—It is quoted in *Vivādacintāmaṇi*
(Calcutta, p. 71), which says that this refers to cases of mutual
defamation between the Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣatriya, and adds that the same
law holds good as between the Vaiśya and the Śūdra also-;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 150a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.276-278)  
**

[(See texts under
268-270.)]
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

276	(For mutual abuse) by a Brahmana and a Kshatriya a fine must be imposed by a discerning (king), on the Brahmana the lowest amercement, but on the Kshatriya the middlemost.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/277_viT-shUdrayor_evam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>277 विट्-शूद्रयोर् एवम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

विट्-शूद्रयोर् एवम् एव  
स्वजातिं प्रति तत्त्वतः ।  
छेद-वर्जं प्रणयनं  
दण्डस्येति विनिश्चयः  ॥ ८.२७७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/277_viT-shUdrayor_evam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

On the Vaiśya and the Śūdra also, the inflicting of punishment shall be of the same kind, according to their respective castes,—barring mutilation; such is the decision.—(277)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**एवम् एव** प्रथममध्यमौ साहसाव् इत्य् अतिदिश्यते । तेनैव क्रमेण वैश्यस्य शूद्राक्रोशे प्रथमः । शूद्रस्य वैश्याक्रोशे मध्यमः । **छेदवर्जं** **दण्डस्य प्रणयनम्** इति । "एकजातिर् द्विजातिम्" (म्ध् ८.२७०) इत्य् अनेन जिह्वाछेदं प्राप्तं निवर्तयति । **स्वजातिं प्रतीति** । नैवं मन्तव्यं समानजातीयं[^२१८] प्रतीति । किं तर्हि, यात्र जातिर् उपात्ता वैश्यशूद्राव् इति **स्व**ग्रहणम् । श्लोकाभिप्रायं परस्पराक्रोशे यावत् । **स्वजातिम्** इति पूर्वत्रापि संबन्धनीयम् । **प्रणयनम्** प्रवर्तनम् । क्षत्रियस्य वैश्यशूद्राक्षारणे प्रथमार्धसाहसः । एवं ब्राह्मणस्य वैश्यशूद्रयोः कल्पः ॥ ८.२७७ ॥


[^२१८]:
     M G: -jātīya-
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Of the same kind*’—*i.e*., the lowest and the middlemost amercements,
mentioned in the preceding verse. The order should be as follows:—when
the *Vaiśya* abuses the *Śūdra*, he shall be fined the lowest
amercement, and when the *Śūdra* abuses the *Vaiśya*, he shall be fined
the middle amercement.

‘*The inflicting of the punishment shall be the same, barring
mutilation*’;—This includes the ‘cutting off of the tongue’ laid down in
verse 270.

‘*According to their respective castes*’— This should not be understood
to mean that the said fine is to be inflicted when they abuse men *of
their own caste*; the meaning is that the fine shall be in accordance
with the castes mentioned. The sense of the verse is that when these men
abuse men of their own castes, the punishment shall be as laid down
before.

‘*Inflicting*’—Promulgating.

When the *Kṣatriya* abuses the *Vaiśya*, the fine shall consist of half
of the lowest amercement; the same scale shall apply when the *Brāhmaṇa*
abuses the Vaiśya and the Śūdra.—(277)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 250), which adds the
following:—The rule laid down in the preceding verse is applicable to
the Vaiśya and the Śūdra also;—‘*Svajātiṃprati*’—‘as between persons of
the same caste’ (the punishment is to be inflicted) ‘*tattvataḥ*,’ in
accordance with the superiority or inferiority of position and
qualifications;—‘*chedavarjam*’, this precludes the cutting of the
tongue.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.207), to the effect that when the Vaiśya
abuses the Śūdra, he is to be fined 50 *paṇas*. *Bālambhaṭṭī* has the
following notes:—‘*Viṭśūdrayoḥ* in the case of the Vaiśya and the
Śūdra—‘*Svajātiṃ prati*’—insuring each other,—‘*evameva*,’ the case is
to be treated as in the case of the Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣatriya,—*i*.
*e*., when the Vaiśya insults the Śūdra, he should pay the ‘first
amercement,’ and when the Śūdra insults the Vaiśya, he should pay the
‘middle amercement,’—this should be the penalty inflicted, and there is
to be no cutting of the tongue;—‘*tattvataḥ*,’ this is the legal
punishment.—This verse, as also the preceding one, refers to a case
where the defamation is in regard to a heinous offence.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 150a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.276-278)  
**

[(See texts under
268-270.)]
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अयम् अपर उपदेशसामर्थ्याद् विकल्पार्थो विधिर् उच्यते । यदा ब्राह्मणः क्षत्रियम् आक्रोशति तदा तस्य पूर्वसाहसः । यदा च क्षत्रियो ब्राह्मणं तदा तत्र मध्यमः साहसः । एवं क्षत्रियवैश्ययोस् तथा वैश्यशूद्रयोः । एवं च सति शूद्रस्य जिह्वाछेदनवर्जं दण्डनिपातनम् उक्तं भवति ॥ ८.२७५–७६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

277	A Vaisya and a Sudra must be punished exactly in the same manner according to their respective castes, but the tongue (of the Sudra) shall not be cut out; that is the decision.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/278_eSha_daNDavidhiH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>278 एष दण्डविधिः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एष दण्डविधिः प्रोक्तो  
वाक्पारुष्यस्य तत्त्वतः ।  
अत ऊर्ध्वं प्रवक्ष्यामि  
दण्डपारुष्यनिर्णयम्  ॥ ८.२७८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/278_eSha_daNDavidhiH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Thus the law relating to punishments in connection with verbal assaults been truly expounded; after thisI am going to profound the law relating to physical assault.—(278)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**दण्डपारुष्यं** दण्डेन दुःखोत्पादनम्, यथा कण्टकादेः पुरुषस्य स्पर्शः पीडाकर एवं पीडाकरत्वसामान्यात् **पारुष्य**शब्दप्रयोगः । तत्र **निर्णयो** दण्डविशेषनिर्णयः । पूर्वप्रकरणोपसंहारोपन्यासार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.२७८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Physical assault*’—Causing suffering by physical hurt; the term
‘*pāruṣya*’ (‘*hurt*’) has been used in the sense that ‘assault’ causes
pain in the same manner as the thrusting of the thorn does.

‘*Law*’—*i.e*., rules relating to the details of punishment.

This verse serves the purpose of summing up the foregoing section and
introducing the next.—(278)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.276-278)  
**

[(See texts under
268-270.)]
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

278	Thus the rules for punishments (applicable to cases) of defamation have been truly declared; I will next propound the decision (of cases) of assault.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/279_yena_kena.md">
<details open><summary><h3>279 येन केन ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

येन केन चिद् अङ्गेन  
हिंस्याच् चेच् छ्रेष्ठम् अन्त्यजः ।  
छेत्तव्यं तद् तद् एवाऽस्य  
तन् मनोर् अनुशासनम्  ॥ ८.२७९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/279_yena_kena.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

With whatever limb the low-born man hurts a superior person, every such limb of his shall be cut off; this is the teaching of Manu.—(279)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अन्त्यजः** शूद्रश् चण्डालपर्यन्तः । **श्रेष्ठः** त्रैवर्णिकः । **तं चेद् धिंस्याद् अङ्गेन केनचित्** साक्षाद् दण्डकड्गादिप्रहरणव्यवधानेन वा, **तद् **अङ्गम्** अस्य**[^२१९] **छेत्तव्यम्** । हिंसा च क्रोधेन प्रहरणं ताडनेच्छया हस्ताद्य् उद्यम्य वेगेन निपातनम्, मारणम् एव । **तद् तद्** इति वीप्सा, अङ्गम् इति छेत्तव्यम् इति चैकत्वविवक्षा मा विज्ञायि[^२२०] । तेनानेकेनाङ्गेन[^२२१] प्रहरणे ऽनेकस्यैव छेदः । **अनुशासनम्** उपदेशः, मनुकृतैषा[^२२२] मर्यादा । **अनुशासन**ग्रहणं कारुणिकस्य राज्ञः प्रवृत्त्यर्थः ॥ ८.२७९ ॥


[^२२२]:
     M G: upadeśopanukṛtaiṣā


[^२२१]:
     M G: caikatvavivakṣām āvijñāpitenānekenāṅgena


[^२२०]:
     DK (1: 1801): vijñāyīti


[^२१९]:
     M G: tadaṅgasya
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Low-born man*’— from the *Śūdra* down to the *Caṇḍāla*.

‘*Superior person*’—belonging to the three higher castes.

If the former hurts the latter with any ‘limb,’—either directly, or
through the instrumentality of a stick or a sword or some such
weapon,—then ‘*that limb of his shall be cut off*.’

The term ‘*hiṃsā*’ (*hurt*) here stands for *striking in anger,
intentionally raising the hand or some weapon and letting it fall upon
another*,—and not actually *killing*.

The repetition of the pronoun ‘*tat tat*’ (‘every such’) is meant to
guard against the idea that only *one* limb is to be cut off, which
might arise from the use of the singular number in ‘*aṅgam*’ (‘limb’).
Hence in a case where the hurt is inflicted by several limbs, all these
limbs should be cut off.

‘*Teaching*’— advice. Such is the law laid down by Manu. This has been
added with a view to make a lenient king inflict the severe
punishment.—(279)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 258), which explains
‘*hiṃsyāt*,’ as ‘strikes,’—‘*śreyāṃsam*’ (which is its reading for
‘*checcreṣṭham*’) as ‘one of the three higher castes—and ‘*antyajaḥ*’ as
the ‘Śūdra’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 146b).

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 100);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 288);—in *Aparārka* (p. 813), to the effect that the limb
should be cut off, if a, Śūdra causes pain to a Brāhmaṇa, or a Kṣatriya
or a Vaiśya;—and in *Mitākṣarā* (2.215), to the effect that if a Śūdra
causes pain to the Brāhmaṇa, or to the Kṣatriya, or to the Vaiśya, his
limb should be cut off; and adds that inasmuch as this lays down the
cutting of the limb of a Śūdra who strikes any *twice-born* person, it
follows, from the parity of reasoning, that this same punishment is to
be inflicted upon the Vaiśya striking the Kṣatriya. *Bālambhaṭṭī* has
the following notes:—‘*Śreyāṃsam*,’ higher caste, twice-born
caste,—‘*antyaja*,’ he who is born of the *lower-most* (‘*antya*’) limb,
or one born of the lowest caste,—*i.e*., the Śūdra. This same rule is
applicable also to the Vaiśya striking the Kṣatriya, as the former is
‘*antyaja*’ ‘low-born,’ in comparison with the latter, who therefore is
‘*śreyān*,’ ‘superior.’

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 44b);—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 75), which explains ‘*śreyāṃsam*’ (which
is its reading for ‘*śreṣṭham*’) as ‘the three higher castes,’ and
‘*antyaja*’ as ‘*Śūdra*.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.279-280)  
**

*Gautama* (12.1).—‘A Śūdra who criminally assaults twice-born men with
blows shall he deprived of the limb with which he offends.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.19).—‘With whatever limb an inferior insults or hurts his
superior in caste, of that limb the King shall cause him to be
deprived.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.215).—‘That limb of a non-Brāhmaṇa with which he hurts
the Brāhmaṇa should he cut off. If he raises a weapon to strike him, he
shall pay a fine of the first degree; if he only touches the weapon,
then only half of that.’

*Ārthaśāstra* (p. 106).—‘By whatever limb the Śūdra strikes the
Brāhmaṇa, that limb should be cut off; if he only raises a weapon to
strike, some portion of a limb may be cut off; if he only touches the
weapon, the penalty shall be half of that.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 262).—‘For raising the hand to strike a
man of one’s own caste, the fine is 12 *Paṇas*; double of that for
actually striking him.’

*Nārada* (15-16.25).—‘With whatever limb a man of low caste offends a
Brāhmaṇa, that very limb of his shall be cut off; such shall be the
atonement for his crime.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अयम् उक्तस्य विशेषप्रपञ्चस्य सामान्यनिर्देशः । श्रेष्ठं द्विजातिम्[आत्रम् इति] निदर्शनाच् च पूर्ववर्णस्य हिंसायाम् उत्तरेणाप्य् एतद् विज्ञेयम् । न केवलं शूद्रस्य पूर्वापराधे । अस्य सामान्यश्लोकस्य चत्वारो वक्ष्यमाणाः श्लोकाः प्रपञ्चाः ॥ ८.२७७–७८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

279	With whatever limb a man of a low caste does hurt to (a man of the three) highest (castes), even that limb shall be cut off; that is the teaching of Manu.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/280_pANim_udyamya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>280 पाणिम् उद्यम्य ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पाणिम् उद्यम्य दण्डं वा  
पाणिच्छेदनम् अर्हति ।  
पादेन प्रहरन् कोपात्  
पादच्छेदनम् अर्हति  ॥ ८.२८० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/280_pANim_udyamya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If he raises his hand or a stick, he should have his hand cut off; if he strikes in anger with the foot, his foot shall be cut off.—(280)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**उद्यम्य** उत्क्षिप्यैव **कोपात्** ताडनेच्छोस् तदङ्गम् अनिपातयतो ऽस्य **पाणिः छेतव्यः** । **दण्ड**ग्रहणं समानपीडाकरस्य हिंसासाधनस्योपलक्षणार्थम् । तेन मृदुशफादाव् अन्यो दण्डः । **पादेन प्रहरन्न्** इति । अत्राप्य् **उद्यम्येत्य्** अपेक्षितव्यम् । अवगुरतो ऽप्य् एष एव (च्ड़्। म्ध् ४.१६५) ॥ ८.२८० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If he raises his hand for the purpose of striking, then the hand should
be cut off,—even though he may not actually strike.

‘*Stick*’ stands for anything that hurts in the same manner as the stick
does. Hence if he strikes with the soft root of the lily and such
things, the punishment shall be less severe.

‘*If he strikes with the foot*’;—here also *raising* is to be
understood.

‘Threatening’ also is included herein.—(280)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p, 268) in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 288), which adds that, though in the case of other castes
raising a weapon to strike one of a higher caste, the penalty is to be
the ‘first amercement,’ yet for the Śūdra it has to be the cutting of
the hand and other limbs.

This is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 814);—in *Mitākṣarā* (2.215), to the
effect that in the case of the Śūdra for merely raising a weapon, the
hand is to be cut off;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 75);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 146b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.279-280)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.279].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

280	He who raises his hand or a stick, shall have his hand cut off; he who in anger kicks with his foot, shall have his foot cut off.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/281_sahAsanam_abhiprepsur.md">
<details open><summary><h3>281 सहासनम् अभिप्रेप्सुर् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सहासनम् अभिप्रेप्सुर्  
उत्कृष्टस्याऽपकृष्टजः ।  
कट्यां कृताङ्को निर्वास्यः  
स्फिचं वास्याऽवकर्तयेत्  ॥ ८.२८१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/281_sahAsanam_abhiprepsur.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a low-born person tries to occupy the same seat with his superior, he should be branded on the hip and banished; or the king shall have his buttocks cut off.—(281)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**उत्कृष्टो** ब्राह्मणो जातितो दौःशील्याद् अवकृष्टो ऽपि, इतरे वर्णा औत्तराधर्येण परस्परापक्षयोत्कृष्टाश् चावकृष्टाश् च । तत्रेह[^२२३] **अवकृष्टज** इति जनिना जन्मावकर्ष[^२२४] उपात्तः,[^२२५] तत्संनिधानाद् उत्कर्षो ऽपि जन्मनैव । जन्मना च निरपेक्षोत्कर्षो ब्राह्मणस्य नापकर्षः । तेन शूद्रस्यायं ब्राह्मणेन सहैकम् आसनम् आरूढवतो दण्डः । **कटिः** श्रोणी । तत्र कृतचिह्नः । अङ्कविधौ च सुधाकुंकुमादिना चिह्नकरणमात्रम्, अपि तु[^२२६] दण्डख्यापनार्थम्[^२२७] । अतिक्रमाद् विभियुर्[^२२८] इति । तेन देशान्तरे यद् अनपायि तच् चिह्नम् आयसो लेखनाद् उपदिश्यते । तथा च वक्ष्यति "उद्वेजनकरैर् दण्डैर् चिहनयित्वा" (म्ध् ८.३५२) इति । राष्ट्राच् च निष्कास्यः । **स्फिक्** श्रोण्येकदेशः । सव्यो दक्षिणश् च । तं **चावकर्तयेत्** चिह्नेन । विकल्पविधानात् तावन्मातरच्छेदो न सर्वस्य स्फिजः । **अभिप्रेप्सुर्** इति च नेच्छामात्रेण । किं तर्हि, प्राप्तवत एव । इच्छाया शक्यापह्नवत्वाद् दण्डस्य च महत्त्वात् ॥ ८.२८१ ॥


[^२२८]:
     M G: vibhidyur


[^२२७]:
     M G: daṇḍaḥ khyāpanārthaḥ


[^२२६]:
     M G DK: api ayaṃ tu


[^२२५]:
     M G: upāttaṃ


[^२२४]:
     M G: janma cotkarṣa


[^२२३]:
     J: tatra
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Superior*’—i.e., the Brāhmaṇa, who is always ‘superior’ by reason of
his caste, even though he be ‘inferior’ on account of his bad character.
In the case of the other castes ‘superiority’ and ‘inferiority’ are
relative and comparative (so that everyone of them may be ‘superior’ and
also ‘inferior’). It is for this reason that the text has used the term
‘lowborn,’ where the term ‘born’ shows that what is meant is
‘inferiority’ by *birth*; hence on account of its proximity, the
‘superiority’ also should be understood to be by *birth*. This
superiority by *birth* belongs to the Brāhmaṇa, irrespectively of other
considerations, and he is never ‘inferior.’ From all which it follows
that the punishment here laid down is for the *Śūdra* who occupies the
same seat with the *Brāhmaṇa*.

‘*Hips*,’—buttocks;—‘*branded*’ upon that. This ‘branding’ is to be not
mere marking with lime or saffron or such things; but it is to be
indicative of the man’s having undergone the punishment; so that others
might fight shy of the same transgression. Hence the marking prescribed
is one that is ineffaceable, and should he done with an iron-nail or
some such thing; as is going to be laid down below (8.352)—‘Punishments
that strike terror, etc., etc.’

He should also be ‘*banished*’ from the kingdom.

‘*Sphik*’ is the name of a part of the buttocks, on both the right and
the left side. This he ‘*shall have cut off*.’ In as much as this is an
alternative to ‘branding,’ it is only the part, and not the entire
buttock, that is to be cut off.

‘*Tries to occupy*’;—the man is to be punished not merely for *trying*
to do so, but only when he has actually occupied it; because the mere
*wish* or *attempt* can be hidden (and hence may not he discovered), and
also because the penalty laid down is very severe.—(281)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka*, (p. 814);—and in *Vivādaratnākara*
(p. 268), which adds the following notes:—‘*Sahāsanamabhiprepsuḥ*’
sitting on the same seat,—‘*abhiprepsu*’ (lit. *desirous of getting at*)
standing here for actually *getting at* itself,—the man sitting upon the
same seat with his superior should be ‘branded on his hip and
banished—‘*utkṛṣṭa*,’ the Brāhmaṇa, ‘*apakṛṣṭaja*,’ the
Śūdra,—‘*kṛtāṅkah*’, branded with red hot iron,—‘*spicha*,’ a part of
the loin;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p.75), which says that the
‘branding’ is to be done with iron, and that ‘*spicha*’ is a part of the
waist.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (12.7).—‘If he assumes a position equal to that of twice-born
men, in sitting, in lying down, in conversation, or on the road, he
shall undergo corporal punishment.’

*Āpastamba* (2.27.15).—‘A. Śūdra who assumes a position equal to that of
a member of the first three castes, in conversation, on the road, or a
coach, in sitting and on similar occasions, shall be flogged.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.20).—‘If he places himself on the same seat with his
superior, he shall be banished with a mark on his buttocks.’

*Nārada* (15-16. 26).—‘A low-born man, who tries to place himself on the
same seat with his superior in caste, shall be branded on his hip and
banished; or the King shall cause his backside to be gashed.’
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

281	A low-caste man who tries to place himself on the same seat with a man of a high caste, shall be branded on his hip and be banished, or (the king) shall cause his buttock to be gashed.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/282_avaniShThIvato_darpAd.md">
<details open><summary><h3>282 अवनिष्ठीवतो दर्पाद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अवनिष्ठीवतो दर्पाद्  
द्वाव् ओष्ठौ छेदयेन् नृपः ।  
अवमूत्रयतो मेढ्रम्  
अवशर्धयतो गुदम्  ॥ ८.२८२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/282_avaniShThIvato_darpAd.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If, out of arrogance, he spits, the king should have his two lips cut off; if he urinates, then his penis; and if he breaks wind, his anus.—(282)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

मूत्रेणावसिञ्चतो ऽभिमुखं वा तदवमानार्थं क्षिपतो ऽसत्य् अपि संस्पर्शे ऽवमानयते मूत्रेणेति निष्कर्तव्यः । समानफलत्वाद् एतस्यापि दण्डो ऽयम् । **निष्टीवनं** नासिकास्यश्रावः । तस्य[^२२९] घ्राणेन क्षेपे नासापुटच्छेदः, "येनाङ्गेन" (म्ध् ८.२७९) इत्य् उक्तत्वात् । **शर्धनं** कुत्सितो गुदशब्दः । **दर्पान्** न प्रमादात् ॥ ८.२८२ ॥


[^२२९]:
     M G: nāsikāsyaśrāvasya
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If he sprinkles urine on his superior, or passes urine in his presence,
with a view to insult him,—then, even though the urine may not actually
touch the man, yet, in as much as he insults his superior with
‘urination,’ the penis shall he cut off.

This same rule applies to the case of *semen*; as the effect is the same
in this ease also.

‘Spitting’ consists in letting the fluid pass out of the nostrils or the
mouth. Hence if it is done through the nostrils, it is the nostrils that
have to be cut off; in accordance with what has been said (under 279)
regarding the punishment to be inflicted upon that limb with which the
offence has been committed.

‘*Breaking wind*’—is making an improper sound with the anus.

All this is to be punished, when done ‘*out of arrogance*’ and not when
done by chance.—(282)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 268), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Āvaniṣṭhīvato darpāt*’, through arrogance spitting on
the superior,—‘*avamūtrayataḥ*,’ sprinkling urine,—‘*avaśardhayataḥ*,’
passing wind through the anus with a loud sound;—in *Aparārka* (p. 814),
which takes it as prescribing the penalty for the *Śūdra* doing these
things upon twice-born persons;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p,
288);—in *Mitākṣarā*, (2. 115) where *Bālambhaṭṭī* remarks that the acts
here mentioned are indications of disregard and contempt;—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, pp. 75 and 73).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.21-22).—‘If he spits on him, he shall lose both lips;—if he
breaks wind against him, his hind-parts.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 106).—‘If he touches one with unclean limbs, or with
the feet, or with spittings, he shall be fined 6 *Paṇas*; if with vomits
or urine or ordure, 12 *Paṇas*; if he touches the body above the navel,
the double of these; if on the head, then four times. This among equals.
If one does all this to a superior, then the fine shall be double; half
only if it is done inadvertently.’

*Nārada* (15-16. 27).—‘If, through arrogance, he spits on a superior,
the King shall have both his lips to be cut off; if he makes water on
him, the penis: if he breaks wind against him, the buttocks.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.213-214).—‘If one touches another person with ashes, or
mud, or dust,—the fine shall be 10 *Paṇa*.s; if he touches him with an
unclean hand, or with the foot, or with spittings, the fine shall be
double of that. This refers to the case of equals; if the offence is
against another man’s wife, or against superior persons, the fine shall
be double; if against inferiors, it shall be half; there is to be no
punishment if all this is done under the influence of liquor and such
things.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 813).—‘The fine is to be quadrupled if one
touches another person with vomitings, urine or ordure; and sixfold if
the middle of the body is touched; and eightfold, if the head is
touched.’

*Hārīta* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 266).—‘If one of a lower caste catches
hold of the neck, or breasts or hair or mouth of a person of the higher
caste, the fine shall be 30; 63, for uprooting his hair and for
threatening him.’
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

282	If out of arrogance he spits (on a superior), the king shall cause both his lips to be cut off; if he urines (on him), the penis; if he breaks wind (against him), the anus.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/283_kesheShu_gRhNato.md">
<details open><summary><h3>283 केशेषु गृह्णतो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

केशेषु गृह्णतो हस्तौ  
छेदयेद् अविचारयन् ।  
पादयोर् दाढिकायां च  
ग्रीवायां वृषणेषु च  ॥ ८.२८३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/283_kesheShu_gRhNato.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If he catches hold of the hair, the king shall unhesitatingly have his hands out off; also if he lays hold of the feet, the beard, the neck, or the scrotum.—(283)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"दर्पाद्" इत्य् अनुवर्तते । परिभवबुद्ध्या **केशेषु** ब्राह्मणं **गृह्णतः** शूद्रस्य **हस्तौ छेदयेत्** । द्विवचम् एकेनापि द्वाभ्यां तुल्यपीडाकरणे[^२३०] उभयच्छेदो नैकस्यैव । **दाडिका** श्मश्रु । अन्यद् अपि यद् अङ्गं गृह्यमाणं ग्रीवादितुल्यपीडाकरं तत्र सर्वथाप्य् अयम् एव दण्डः । **अविचारयन्** । पीडा कियत्य् अस्य गृहीतस्य संजाता महती स्वल्पा वेति एतद् अनुबन्धश्लोकप्राप्तं विचारणं निवार्यते[^२३१] । ग्रहणमात्रे दण्डः ॥ ८.२८३ ॥


[^२३१]:
     M G: vivaraṇaṃ vicāryate


[^२३०]:
     M G J: tulyapīḍākara
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The phrase ‘*out of arrogance*’ of the preceding verse has to be
construed with this verse also.

If the *Śūdra* lays hold of the Brāhmaṇa’s hair, with a view to insult
him, his hands should be cut off. The dual number has been used for the
purpose of indicating that even when the catching is done with a single
hand, since the pain caused is the same as that in the case of catching
with both hands, it is *both* the hands that shall be cut off, and not
*one* only.

‘*Dāḍhikā*’ is *beard*.

In the case of other parts of the body also, the catching of which
causes the same pain as the catching of the neck and other limbs
mentioned, the punishment shall be the same as the one here laid down.

‘*Unhesitatingly*’;—this forbids any consideration regarding the exact
amount of pain caused by the catching,—whether it has been much or
otherwise. The sense is that the punishment is to be inflicted for the
mere *catching*.—(288)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

It is difficult to see why Hopkins calls the reading ‘*dāḍhikāyām*,’
‘obscure.’

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 814), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Dāḍhikāyām*’—on the beard,—‘*Vṛsaṇeṣu* scrotum and the rest; if
the scrotum *alone* were meant, then the plural ending could not be
justified;—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 268), which remarks that the dual
ending has been used in ‘*hastau*’ with a view to indicate that *both
hands* are to be cut off even though the beard be held by one only; and
it explains ‘*dāḍhikā*,’ as ‘beard’—and in *Vivādachintāmaṇi* (Calcutta,
p, 76), which explains these two verses to mean that ‘if a Śūdra insults
a man of any of the higher castes by spitting at him, his lips should be
cut off—if by urinating on his body, his urinary organ should be cut
off,—if by passing wind over him, the anus should be cut off,—and if by
catching hold of his hair, then his hands should be cut off.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.65).—‘If he seizes him by his feet, by his hair, by his
garment, or by his hand, he shall pay ten *Paṇas*.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 106).—‘On touching his feet, garment, hands or hair,
the fine shall be multiples of six respectively.’

*Nārada* (15-16.28).—‘If he pulls a superior by the hair, the King shall
unhesitatingly cause his hands to be out off; likewise if he seizes him
by the feet, beard, neck or scrotum.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.217).—‘For pulling a person by the feet, hair, garment
or hands,—there shall be a fine of 10 *Paṇas*; for causing pain,
dragging, binding with cloth and striking with the feet, the fine shall
be a hundred.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवं च सति न मारणम् एव हिंसा, किं तर्हि अनेकोपायसाध्यं च परदुःख्[ओत्पादनम्, द्वि]जातीनाम् एवान्योन्यव्यतिक्रमे धनदण्ड उच्यते, पूर्वदण्डस्य वैकल्पिकः, एतेषाम् अप्रत्ययापराधापेक्षया ॥ ८.२८२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

283	If he lays hold of the hair (of a superior), let the (king) unhesitatingly cut off his hands, likewise (if he takes him) by the feet, the beard, the neck, or the scrotum.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/284_tvagbhedakaH_shatam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>284 त्वग्भेदकः शतम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

त्वग्भेदकः शतं दण्ड्यो  
लोहितस्य च दर्शकः ।  
मांसभेत्ता तु षण्-निष्कान्  
प्रवास्यस् त्व् अस्थिभेदकः  ॥ ८.२८४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/284_tvagbhedakaH_shatam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One who bruises the skin should be fined one hundred; as also one who fetches blood; he who cuts the flesh, six ‘niṣkas’ and the bone-breaker should be banished.—(284)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

द्विजातीनाम् अयं परस्परापराधे, शूद्रस्य तु शूद्रापराधे, उच्यते[^२३२] । यः केवलाम् एव त्वचं भिन्द्याद् विदारयेन् न लोहितं दर्शयेत् तस्य **शतं दण्डः** । तावद् एव **लोहितदर्शने** । यद्य् अपि **त्वग्बेदम्** अन्तरेण न लोहितं दृश्यते, तथाप्य् अधिकापराधाद् अधिकदण्डे प्राप्ते शतवचनं[^२३३] नियमार्थम् ।


[^२३३]:
     M G: śatavacana-


[^२३२]:
     M G DK (1: 1804): manyate

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु कर्णनासिकादेर् अपि स्रवति शोणितं बहिस्त्वग्भेदे ऽपि तदर्थम् उच्यत इत्य् आहुस् । 

<u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । अन्तर्भेदे हि महत्त्वान् महादण्डो युक्तः । तस्माद् यत्रेषत्स्रवति शोणितं तत्र शतं । शिरोभेदे तु मांसवत् ।   
**निष्क**शब्दः सुवर्णपरिमाणवाचीत्य् उक्तम् । **प्रवास्यो** **ऽस्थ्नां भेदकस्** तत्प्रयोजक इति । घञन्तेन समासं कृत्वा तं करोतीति पठितव्यः- अस्थिभेदकृद् इति । प्रवासनम् अर्थशास्त्रप्रवृत्त्या मारणम्, निर्वासनं वा । दण्डविधौ ह्य् अर्थशास्त्रश्रवणं दृश्यते । तथा हि "दशबन्धम्" इति बार्हस्पत्य औशनस्ये च प्रयोगः । निर्वासनं ब्राह्मणस्य नान्येषाम् ॥ ८.२८४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What is here laid down pertains to offences committed among the
twice-born men themselves, as also between two *Śūdras*.

When one only ‘*breaks*’ or pierces the skin, and fetches no blood, the
fine is one hundred.

The same also when blood flows out. Though no blood can flow out unless
the skin has been broken, yet the limitation on the fine has been laid
down with a view to preclude the idea that since the hurt is more
serious, the punishment should he heavier.

Others hold that this has been added in view of the fact that blood
flows also out of the ear, the nostrils and such other pans, as also out
of the outer skin (and the rule is meant to apply to this latter ease).

This however is not right. Because in a case where there is internal
hurt, the pain is very severe, and the punishment therefore should be
proportionately heavy. Hence what is meant is that the fine of one
hundred shall be inflicted in a case where only a small quantity of
blood has flown out.

In the case of head-breaking, the punishment shall be the same as that
in the case of cutting the flesh.

The term ‘*niṣka*’ here stands for a measure of gold, as has been
already explained before.

‘*The breaker of bones should be banished*,’;—*i.e*., one who causes the
bone to be broken. The compound ‘*asthibhedakaḥ*’ should be explained by
compounding ‘*asthi*’ (‘*bone*’) with the term ‘*bheda*’ which ends with
the ‘*ghañ*’ affix, and then adding the causal affix in the sense of
‘*doing*’ to the compound thus formed (*i.e*., ‘*asthibhedam karoti iti
asthibhedakaḥ*’).

‘Banishment’ is an alternative to ‘Death.’ In works dealing with the
science of government, in the sections dealing with punishments, we find
the latter penalty laid down; for instance, in the works of *Bṛhaspati*
and *Uśanas*. So ‘banishment’ applies to the case of Brāhmaṇas, and
‘death’ to that of others.—(284)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“According to Rāghavānanda the rule refers to Śūdras assaulting Śūdras.
According to Nārāyaṇa, the last offender’s property shall be
confiscated.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 164), which remarks that
in view of the law laid down by Viṣṇu, that for causing bleeding the
fine shall be 64 *paṇas*,—the penalty here laid down should be
understood to be applicable to cases where there is much bleeding caused
by the tearing of the skin.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 287);—in *Aparārka* (p.
815) which adds that, the bleeding is due to grievous hurt, then the
fine is to be 100, otherwise 64;—in *Mitākṣarā* (2.218), where
*Bālambhaṭṭī* remarks that the penalty here laid down applies to cases
where the hurt has been inflicted on some vital part of the body;—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 74), which explains ‘*niṣka*’ as
equivalent to four ‘*suvarṇas*’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.66-72).—‘If he causes pain to him, without fetching blood, he
shall pay 32 *Paṇas*; for fetching blood, 64;—for mutilating or injuring
a hand, or a foot, or a tooth,—and for slitting an ear, or the nose,—the
second amercement. For rendering a man unable to move about, or to oat,
or to speak,—or for striking him violently,—the same punishment is
ordained. For wounding or breaking an eye, or the neck, or an arm, or a
hone, or a shoulder, the highest amercement. For striking out both eyes
of a man, the King shall confine him and not release him from the jail
as long as he lives;—or he shall order him to be mutilated in the same
way.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.218-220).—‘If one causes pain with wood and other
things, without fetching blood, he should ho made to pay a fine of 32
*Paṇas*; on fetching blood, the double of that. If he breaks a hand, or
a foot, or a tooth, or slits the ear or the nose, or reopens a wound, or
beats him nearly to death,—the middle amercement. On incapacitating him
from moving, eating or speaking, also for piercing the eyes and other
organs, or for breaking the shoulder, or the arms or the thighs, the
middle amercement.’

*Nārada* (15-16.29).—‘If a man breaks the skin of an equal, or fetches
blood from him, he shall be fined a hundred *Paṇas*; if he cuts the
flesh, 6 *Niṣkas*; if he breaks a bone, ho shall be banished.’

*Bṛhaspati* (22.720).—‘For injuring a person with bricks, stones or a
wooden club, he shall he fined two *Māṣas*; double of this, if blood
flows. For tearing the skin, the lowest amercement shall be inflicted;
for tearing the flesh, the middle amercement; for breaking a hone, the
highest amercement; for killing, capital punishment. For breaking the
oar, the nose or hand, or injuring teeth, or feet,—the middle
amercement; and double of that for cutting off any of those limbs. He
who injures a limb or divides it, shall be compelled to pay the expense
of curing it.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 107).—‘On hurting a person, without fetching blood,
with wood, stones, bricks, iron-stick, or ropes—the fine shall be 24
*Paṇas*; double of that if blood is fetched. The lowest amercement for
beating a man nearly to death, without fetching blood; as also for
disabling a hand or foot. For breaking the hand or foot, or for tearing
the nose or the ear, or for opening a wound, the same punishment. For
breaking the thigh or the neck or the eyes, or making one unable to
speak or move or eat,—the middle amercement; also the expenses for
effecting a cure. If the man happen to die, the culprit should be tried
as a heinous criminal.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 265).—‘For striking a man with bricks,
stones or wooden sticks, the fine is two *Māṣas*; double of this if
blood is fetched; for cutting of the ear, the lip, the nose, the eye,
the tongue, the penis or the hand,—the highest amercement; and for
piercing these, the middle amercement.’

*Hārīta* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 266).—‘If a low-caste man breaks the head,
or ears or any limb of a person of the higher castes, he shall be fined
200 *Purāṇas*; for striking him with the foot, his feet shall be cut
off, or he shall he fined 500.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यस् त्वचो विकारं दर्शयत्य् अलोहितं स विज्ञेयस् त्वग्भेदकः । ऋज्व् अन्यत् । अस्य तु विशेषः । मनुष्यानां पशूनां चेति ॥ ८.२८३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

284	He who breaks the skin (of an equal) or fetches blood (from him) shall be fined one hundred (panas), he who cuts a muscle six nishkas, he who breaks a bone shall be banished.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/285_vanaspatInAM_sarveShAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>285 वनस्पतीनां सर्वेषाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वनस्पतीनां सर्वेषाम्  
उपभोगो यथा यथा ।  
यथा तथा दमः कार्यो  
हिंसायाम् इति धारणा  ॥ ८.२८५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/285_vanaspatInAM_sarveShAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of all trees, as their usefulness so should be the punishment inflicted for injuring them; this is the settled rule.—(285)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**वनस्पति**ग्रहणं सर्वस्थावरप्रदर्शनार्थम् । फलपुष्पपत्रच्छायादिना महोपभोग्यस्य वृक्षस्य **हिंसायां** विनाशे[^२३५] दण्ड उत्तमसाहसः,[^२३६] मध्यमस्य मध्यमः, निकृष्टस्य प्रथमः । तथा स्थानविशेषो द्रष्टव्यः- पत्रच्छेदः फलच्छेदः शाखाधेद इति । फलानाम् अपि विशेषो महार्घता दुष्प्रापता । तथा स्थानविशेषो ऽपि द्रष्टव्यः- सीम्नि चतुष्पथे तपोवन इति ॥ ८.२८५ ॥


[^२३६]:
     M G DK (1: 1804) add: sa


[^२३५]:
     M G: vināśam āha; J omit: vināśe
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ‘*trees*’ have been mentioned as representing all immovable things.

When injury is done to a tree which is of great utility, the fine
consists of the ‘highest amercement’; when the tree is of ordinary
utility, it consists of the ‘middle amercement’; and when it is of small
utility, it consists of the ‘lowest amercement.’

Account has also got to be taken of the part of the tree where the
injury is done;—whether it is the leaf, the fruit or the branch that has
been cut off. In regard to fruits also, their market-value has to be
taken into consideration.

Similarly account has to be taken of the position of the tree,—whether
it stands on the boundary, on road-crossings or in a hermitage, and so
on.—(285)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“According to Govindarāja the fine for injuring trees which give shade
only is to be very small; in the case of flower-bearing trees, middling;
and in the case of fruit trees, high.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 100);—and in *Aparārka*
(p. 819).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.55-59).—‘A feller of trees yielding fruit shall pay the
highest amercement; a feller of flower-bearing trees, only the middle
amercement; he who cuts creepers, shrubs or climbing plants shall pay a
hundred *kārṣāpaṇas*; he who cuts grass shall pay one *kārṣāpaṇa*; and
all such offenders shall make good to the owners the revenue which they
yield.’

*Arthaśāstra* (pp. 108-109).—‘One who destroys small things shall make
good their value and also pay a line equal to it;—on destroying large
things, he shall make good their value and pay double that amount as
fine.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.227-229).—‘For tearing the branches of wide-spreading
trees, and of such trees as supply food, the fine shall he 20; for
tearing their trunks, 40, and for destroying the entire tree, 80. For
such trees as are growing on places of worship, in the cremation-ground,
in a sacred place, or in a temple, the fine shall be double. Half of the
above-mentioned fine, in the case of destroying thickets, creepers and
plants.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 286).—‘For the purpose of making
agricultural implements or implements for the household, one may cut
even fruit-bearing and flower-bearing trees and thickets.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अत्र वनस्पतिशब्देन वृक्षाणाम् अपि ग्रहणम् । "अनुबन्धं परिज्ञाय" इत्य् अनेनैवायं श्लोकः उक्तार्थ इति कश्चिद् आह । तद् अयुक्तम् । अस्मिन् हिंसति दण्डविध्यर्थो ऽयं श्लोक उपपद्यते ॥ ८.२८४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

285	According to the usefulness of the several (kinds of) trees a fine must be inflicted for injuring them; that is the settled rule.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/286_manuShyANAm_pashUnAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>286 मनुष्याणाम् पशूनाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

मनुष्याणां पशूनां च  
दुःखाय प्रहृते सति ।  
यथा यथा महद् दुःखं  
दण्डं कुर्यात् तथा तथा  ॥ ८.२८६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/286_manuShyANAm_pashUnAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When a hurt has been inflicted on men or animals, with the motive of causing pain, the king shall inflict punishment in proportion to the greatness of the pain caused.—(286)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद् उक्तं "त्वग्भेदकः" (म्ध् ८.२८४) इति तस्य विशेषो ऽयम् । असति मनुष्यग्रहणे प्राणिमात्रहिंसाविषयत्वे ऽस्य श्लोकस्य महापशूनां क्षुद्राणां च पशुपक्षिमृगाणां तुल्यदण्डता मा भूद् इति तदर्थम् इदम् । **यथा याथा महद् दुःखम्** इति । स्वल्पे भेदने शोणिते च प्राणिनां महत्त्वाद् अल्पत्वे[^२३७] प्रहारस्य शताद् ऊनो ऽपि दण्डम् अर्हति, महति[^२३८] शताद् अभ्यधिको ऽपि । 


[^२३८]:
     M G omit: mahati


[^२३७]:
     M G DK: alpatvaṃ

<u>अन्ये तु</u> महग्रहणान्[^२३९] महति दुःखे दण्डवृद्ध्यर्थम्, नाल्पे ऽपचयार्थम्, यथाश्रुतम् एव । तत्र **दुःखाय प्रहृते** दुःखोत्पत्त्यर्थं प्रहारे । प्रमादतस्[^२४०] तु न वृद्धिः । "अनुबन्धं परिज्ञाय" (म्ध् ८.१२६) इत् अस्यैव श्लोकद्वयम् उदाहरणभङ्ग्या[^२४१] व्याख्येयम् ॥ ८.२८६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse supplies deails (details?) in connection with what has been
said before regarding ‘the breaker of skin, etc.’ (in 281).

If the term ‘*men*’ did not occur, and the verse were taken as referring
to any and every living creature, it would give the idea that the same
punishment is to be inflicted in the case of the larger as well as the
smaller beasts, birds and deer; and it is for the. purpose of precluding
this idea that the term ‘*men*’ has been added.

‘*In proportion to the greatness of the pain earned*’;—if the animal
hurt is a large one, and the extent of the bruise or the quantity of
blood is small, then the hurt being ‘small,’ the fine shall be less than
a hundred; while if the hurt is ‘serious,’ it may exceed a hundred.

Others have said that the text has added the term ‘greatness’ for the
purpose of indicating that in the case of great pain, the fine shall be
increased,—and it does not mean that when the pain caused is not great,
the fine shall be decreased.

‘*With the motive of earning pain*’—*i.e*., when the hurt is inflicted
with the clear intention of giving pain; hence there is no enhancement
of the fine if the hurt has been inflicted by chance carelessness.

These two verses are instances of cases where the attendant
circumstances have to be taken into consideration in the apportioning of
fines for hurt; and it is in this sense that they should be
interpreted.—(286)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 266), which adds that
‘*duḥkhāya*’ means ‘with the intention of giving pain and the addition
of this implies that there is no crime if the hurt is caused by
chance;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 75), which explains
‘*duḥkhāya*’ as ‘with the intention of causing pain.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.286-287)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (5.75-76).—‘All those who have hurt a man, shall pay the expense
of his cure;—so also those who have hurt a domestic animal.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.222).—‘he who hurts a man should pay the expenses of
the cure, and should also be made to pay the fine that has been ordained
in connection with lighting.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 816).—‘On hurting the body or the
sense-organs, the offender should be fined and also made to pay whatever
may satisfy the man hurt, as also the expenses that may be incurred in
the complete healing of the wounds inflicted.’

*Bṛhaspati* (21.10).—‘He who injures a limb, or divides it, or cuts it
off, shall be compelled to pay the expenses of curing it, and he who may
have taken away an article during the quarrel shall restore it.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 107).—‘For breaking the thigh or the neck, for
piercing the eye, and for making a man unable to move, or speak or eat,
the middle amercement shall he inflicted, and the offender shall also be
made to pay the expenses for the healing of the wound.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवं च सत्य् अयं पूर्वस्य हिंसादण्दस्य विशेषार्थो विज्ञेयः । कथम् । "त्वग्भेदक" इति हि यो दण्डविधिर् उक्तः, तस्यापराधानुरूपेणोनाधिकता प्राङ्विवाकेन कल्पनीयेत्य् एवमर्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.२८५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

286	If a blow is struck against men or animals in order to (give them) pain, (the judge) shall inflict a fine in proportion to the amount of pain (caused).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/287_angAvapIDanAyA~n_cha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>287 अङ्गावपीडनायाञ् च ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अङ्गावपीडनायां च  
व्रण-शोनितयोस् तथा [मेधातिथिपाठः - प्राण-शोनितयोस्] ।  
समुत्थानव्ययं दाप्यः  
सर्वदण्डम् अथाऽपि वा  ॥ ८.२८७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/287_angAvapIDanAyA~n_cha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of injury to limbs, as also of strength and of blood,—the man should be made to pay the expenses of recovery, or the whole amount as ‘fine.’—(287)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अङ्गानाम् अवपीडना** दृढरज्ज्वादिग्रहणसंधिविश्लेषणादिना[^२४३] । तत्र यावता धनेन पथ्यभिषगौषधादिमूल्येन प्रत्यापत्तिम् आयाति तावत् पीडितस्य[^२४४] दाप्यः । एवं **प्राणशोणितयोर्** **अवपीडनायाम्**[^२४५] इति समस्तम् अपि योज्यम् । अथ वा **प्राणशोणितयोः** समुत्थानव्ययं दाप्य इति संबन्धः, सामर्थ्याद् अपचितयोर् इति लभ्यते । **समुत्थानं** प्रकृत्यापत्तिः । **प्राणो** बलम् । प्रहारेणास्वस्थस्य भोजनाद् ऋते कार्शाद्युपपत्तौ[^२४६] बलम् अपचीयते । तत्राङ्गे ऽनष्टे प्रत्यागते च यावद् बललाभस् तावत् तदुपयोगि[^२४७] यत्किंचिद् घृततैलाद्[^२४८]इ दापनीयः । एवं शोणिताद्युत्पत्तौ तद्दुर्बलीभूतस्य व्याध्यन्तरं वा प्राप्तस्याप्रकृतशरीरावस्थाप्राप्तेः समुत्थानव्ययं दाप्यः । न चेत् तद् गृह्णाति तदा तच् च दण्डं च परिपिण्ड्य सर्वं राज्ञे दद्यात् ॥ ८.२८७ ॥


[^२४८]:
     M G: vṛtte tailādi


[^२४७]:
     M G DK: tadupayoge


[^२४६]:
     DK: kārśādyutpattau


[^२४५]:
     M G J: avapīḍanānām


[^२४४]:
     M G: tāvad apīḍitasya; DK: tāvad asau pīḍitasya


[^२४३]:
     M G: -grahaṇasaṃbandhi-
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Injury to limbs*’—in the shape of the breaking of joints and the like,
caused by the stroke of tough ropes and the like.

In such cases the man hurt should receive from the assailant the charges
in connection with the physician and the medication incurred in
obtaining recovery.

A similar construction is to be placed upon the compound word
‘*prāṇa-śoṇitayoḥ*,’ ‘*of strength and blood*.’

Or in the case of the latter, the construction may be—‘*prāṇaśoṇitayoḥ
samutthānavyayam dāpyaḥ*,’ ‘he should be made to pay the expenses for
the recovery of strength and blood,’ *i.e*., ‘when these two have
suffered’; this being understood.

‘*Prāṇa*’ means *strength*; when a man becomes ill in consequence of the
hurt received, he has to go without food, and hence becomes emaciated
and loses his strength.

In a case where no limb has been seriously injured, the assailant should
be made to supply just that quantity of butter and oil and such things
as may be needed for the recovery of strength.

Similarly when blood has been fetched, and, as a consequence the man
becomes weak, or contracts some disease,—the assailant shall be made to
pay the expenses incurred in obtaining a complete cure.

If the man hurt does not accept all this, then the whole amount is to be
totalled up and paid to the king as ‘fine.’—(287)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Prāṇa*’—‘vital strength’ (Medhātithi);—‘breathing power’ (Govindarāja
and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 270);—and in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 912).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.286-287)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.286].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

समुत्थानं पुनः प्रत्यापत्तिः तद्गतं व्ययं तस्मै राज्ञा दाप्यो ऽवपीडयिता । अथ त्व् असौ न गृह्णीयाद् अवपीडितः समुत्थानव्ययम् अवपीडकात्, ततो राजैवोभयतः पिण्डीकृत्य गृह्णीयात् ॥ ८.२८६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

287	If a limb is injured, a wound (is caused), or blood (flows, the assailant) shall be made to pay (to the sufferer) the expenses of the cure, or the whole (both the usual amercement and the expenses of the cure as a) fine (to the king).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/288_dravyANi_hiMsyAd.md">
<details open><summary><h3>288 द्रव्याणि हिंस्याद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

द्रव्याणि हिंस्याद् यो यस्य  
ज्ञानतो ऽज्ञानतो ऽपि वा ।  
स तस्योत्पादयेत् तुष्टिं  
राज्ञे दद्याच् च तत्समम्  ॥ ८.२८८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/288_dravyANi_hiMsyAd.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When a man, either intentionally or unintentionally, damages the goods of another, he shall give satisfaction to him and pay to the king a fine equal to it.—(288)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

द्रव्याणि गृहोपकरणानि शूर्पोलूखलघटस्थालीपिठरादीनि अन्यानि वानुक्तदण्डविशेषाणि[^२४९] तेषां हिंसा प्राग्रूपनाशः सत्य् अपि कार्यक्षमत्वे । **ज्ञानतो ऽज्ञानत** इति, प्रमादकृते बुद्धिपूर्वं चाविशेषेण हिंसनात्[^२५०] तस्य द्रव्यस्वामिनो जनयेत् परितोषं तद्रूपान्यदानेन मूल्येन प्रणयेन वा । **राज्ञे** तु द्रव्यमूल्यं द्रव्यं वा **दद्यात्** । अस्य क्वचिद् अपवादः[^२५१] ॥ ८.२८८ ॥


[^२५१]:
     DK adds: carmacārmiketyādi


[^२५०]:
     M G: hiṃsata; DK: hiṃsatā


[^२४९]:
     M G J: gṛhopakaraṇādy anyāni vānuktadaṇḍaviśeṣāṇi śūrpolūkhalaghaṭasthālīpiṭharādīni
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Goods*’—Household articles,—such as the winnowing basket, the mortar,
the jar-platform, the pot and so forth,—or things in connection with
which no special punishments have been laid down.

The ‘*damage*’ to these consists in destroying their original shape,
even though they still continue to be of use.

‘*Intentionally or unintentionally*’;—there is no distinction to be
made, whether the injury is done by chance, carelessness, or
intentionally.

He shall ‘*give satisfaction*’ to the owner of the goods, either by
offering to him another article of the same kind, or by paying him the
price of the damaged article, or by apologising. And to the king he
shall pay the price of that article.

To this rule, there are some exceptions’ (and these are noted
below).—(288)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 820);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p.
352), which adds that each case has to be taken on its merits, in
relation to the quality of the property damaged;—in *Mitākṣarā* (p.
264);—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 151).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.288-289)  
**

*Arthaśāstra* (pp. 108-109).—([See under
285],
then)—‘For damaging such things as clothes, ornaments, gold-vessels, the
first amercement and also double the value of the article damaged.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 353).—‘If a man should damage, injure
or destroy any articles, he should be made to pay the lowest
amercement.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

जानन्न् अजानन् वा हिंसयन् विनाशयन् दण्ड्यः । न त्व् अज्ञानत इति प्रमोक्तव्यः । तुष्ट्युत्पत्तिश् च तत्प्रतिसंस्कारेण निरन्वयविनाशे वा तथाविधस्यान्यस्य प्रतिपादनेन ॥ ८.२८७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

288	He who damages the goods of another, be it intentionally or unintentionally, shall give satisfaction to the (owner) and pay to the king a fine equal to the (damage).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/289_charma-chArmikabhANDeShu_kAShTha-loShTamayeShu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>289 चर्म-चार्मिकभाण्डेषु काष्ठ-लोष्टमयेषु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

चर्म-चार्मिकभाण्डेषु  
काष्ठ-लोष्टमयेषु ।  
मूल्यात् पञ्चगुणो दण्डः  
पुष्प-मूल-फलेषु च  ॥ ८.२८९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/289_charma-chArmikabhANDeShu_kAShTha-loShTamayeShu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case or leather and leathern vessels, and in that of those made of wood or clay, the fine shall be five times their value; as also in the case of flowers, roots and fruits.—(289)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**चर्मचार्मिकयोर्** द्वन्द्वं कृत्वा **भाण्ड**पदेन विशेष्येण समासः । अथ वा धार्मिकभाण्डयोर् विशेषणसमासं कृत्वा **चर्म**शब्देन द्वन्द्वः । चर्मविकाराच् **चार्मिकाणि** **भाण्डानि** कटिसूत्रवरत्रादीनि । **चर्माण्य्** अविकृतानि गवादीनां । अथ वा **चर्मभाण्डानि** केवचर्ममयानि, चर्मावनद्धानि **चार्मिकाणि** । **काष्ठमयभाण्डान्य्** उलूखलमुसलफलकादीनि । **लोष्ठो** मृद्विकारः पाषाणाकृतिः पिण्डीभूता मृत् । तन्मयानि स्वल्पपाकाधानादीनि । तन्नाशने **मूल्यात् पञ्चगुणो दण्डः** । तुष्ट्युत्पत्तिश् च स्वामिनः स्थितैव ॥ ८.२८९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Between ‘*carma*’ and ‘*cārmika*’ we have the copulative compound, and
between the compound thus formed and the term ‘*bhāṇḍa*’ we have the
Determinate Compound. Or, there is Determinate Compound between
‘*carma*’ and ‘*cārmika*,’ and Copulative Compound between the compound
thus formed and the term ‘*bhāṇḍa*.’

‘*Leathern*’ means *made of leather*; and ‘leathern vessels’ meant are
the leather-bottle and such other articles.

‘*Leather*’—stands for the mere *skin* of the cow and other animals, not
made into anything.

Or, the term ‘*leathern vessel*’ may stand for such vessels as are made
of leather only, while ‘*leathern vessel*’ for those that are only bound
up with leather.

Vessels ‘*made of wood*’—the mortar, the pestle, the board and so forth.

‘*Clay*’ is a form of earth, *i.e*., earth hardened into the form of
stone; and vessels made of these are the cooking utensils, etc.

In the case of damage done to these ‘*the fine shall be five times their
price*’; and the satisfaction of the owner has of course got to be
brought about.—(289)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 352), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Cārmikam*’, ‘shoes and other leather goods,’—some
people explain that in the expressions ‘*carmacārmikam*’, the first
‘*carma*’ serves the purpose of making the meaning
clearer,—‘*kāṣṭhamayam*’, the *Prostha* and such
things,—‘*loṣṭṛamayam*’, the jar and such things,—the fine equal to five
times the value of the flowers eta is one that has been laid down by
Bṛhaspati also, but elsewhere Manu has laid down the fine to be hundred
and more times the value of the flower etc.,—and these are to be
reconciled by the view that the exact fine in each case is to be
determined by the quality of the flower etc., damaged;—it has to be
noted that the satisfaction of the injured party has to be seemed in
these cases also.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 820).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.288-289)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.288].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एतेषां विनाशे पञ्चगुणो दण्डः, न तु तत्समः । एवं चैभ्यो ऽन्यत्र पूर्वश्लोकविधिस् तत्समो विज्ञेयः । तुष्ट्युत्पत्तिश् च व्यवस्थित एव ॥ ८.२८८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

289	In the case of (damage done to) leather, or to utensils of leather, of wood, or of clay, the fine (shall be) five times their value; likewise in the case of (damage to) flowers, roots, and fruit.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/290_yAnasya_chaiva.md">
<details open><summary><h3>290 यानस्य चैव ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यानस्य चैव यातुश् च  
यानस्वामिन एव च ।  
दशातिवर्तनान्य् आहुः  
शेषे दण्डो विधीयते  ॥ ८.२९० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/290_yAnasya_chaiva.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of the conveyance, its rider and its owner, they lay down ten exclusions; for the rest penalties are prescribed.—(290)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सत्याम् अपि हिंसायां क्वचिद् दोषो नास्तीत्य् एतद् अनेन प्रकरणेन प्रदर्श्यते । **यानं** गन्त्र्यादि यादारुह्य यान्ति पन्थानम् । तच् च गन्त्र्यादि बलीवर्दगर्दभमहिषादिवाह्यम् । त एव वा गर्दभादयः पृष्टारोह्या **यानानि** । **याता** तदारूढः सारथ्यादिः । **यानस्वामी** यस्य तत्स्वयानम् । तत्रैषां चक्रवेगादिभी रथाकर्षणयुक्तैर् वाश्वादिभिः कस्यचिद् द्रव्यस्य नाशो वा मरणम् । तत्र पशुस्वामिपालव्यतिक्रमन्याये[^२५२] प्राप्ते कदाचिद् यातुर् दोषः कदाचित् स्वामिनः कदाचिद् उभयोः कदाचिन् न कस्यचिद् अपीति यो विशेषस् तत्र नोक्त इहैवेष्यते, स उच्यते । **अतिवर्तनानि**,[^२५३] अतिक्रम्य हिंसादण्डं वर्तते, नात्र दण्डो ऽस्ति, दण्डनिमित्तानि न भवन्तीति यावत् । **शेषे दण्ड** उक्तेभ्यो निमित्तेभ्यः । अन्यत्र तान्य् अपि वक्ष्यन्ते ॥ ८.२९० ॥


[^२५३]:
     M G omit: ativartanāni


[^२५२]:
     M G: paśusvāmiyāna-

_यत्र नास्ति दोषस् तानि तावद् आह ।_
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The present text proceeds to show that in some oases, even though some
damage may be done, it is not regarded as an offence.

‘*Conveyance*’—the cart and so forth, riding on which people go on a
journey. These carts are drawn by bullocks, mules, buffaloes and such
animals. These same animals also, when ridden upon, may be taken as
meant by the term ‘*Conveyance*.’

‘*Rider*’—the driver and other persons riding in the cart.

‘*Owner of the conveyance*,’—the person to whom the conveyance belongs.

By the force of the running wheels of these carts, or by that of the
horse or other animals pulling the cart on the

road, some damage or death may be caused; and all such cases would come
under the law relating to ‘owner and keeper’ laid down in verse 229 *et
seq*. But in all these, the fault lies sometimes with the rider,
sometimes with the owner, sometimes with both, sometimes with no one;
and these details not having been dealt with on the previous occasion,
they are taken up now.

‘*Exclusions*’—*i.e*., cases where there is no punishment for the
injury; and which therefore are not regarded as offences to be
penalised.

‘*For the rest*’;—*i.e*., for cases other than those just, enumerated,
penalties are prescribed; and these are now going to be described.—(290)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 280), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Yāna*’, the chariot and the rest,—‘*yantṛ*’, the
charioteer,—‘*ativartanāni*’, ‘lying beyond punishment’, *i.e*., not to
be punished;—and in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 1040).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.290-294)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (297-299).—‘In the cases of injury caused through
quadrupeds, or through wood and bricks, or through stones, beasts of
burden or conveyances, there is no offence, if the man operating calls
out—*Move* *out* *of the* *way*;—nor does any offence attach to the
owner of the conveyance, if the injury caused by it has been due, either
to the snapping of the nose-string, or to the breaking of the yoke, or
to the cart moving backwards. In the case of tusked and horned animals
committing havoc, if the owner, though able to do so, does not check
them, he should be made to pay the first amercement; and double of this
when the man about to be injured has cried for help.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

वक्ष्यमाणेषु दशसु निमित्तेषु द्रव्यविनाशे प्राणिवधे वा दण्डो नास्तीत्य् एतद् अतिवर्तनं दण्डस्य । अपरे तु तस्य न दशत्वम् [विवक्षितम्] आहुः ॥ ८.२८९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

290	They declare with respect to a carriage, its driver and its owner, (that there are) ten cases in which no punishment (for damage done) can be inflicted; in other cases a fine is prescribed.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/291_Chinna-nAsye_bhagna-yuge.md">
<details open><summary><h3>291 छिन्न-नास्ये भग्न-युगे ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

छिन्न-नास्ये भग्न-युगे  
तिर्यक्-प्रतिमुखागते ।  
अक्ष-भङ्गे च यानस्य  
चक्र-भङ्गे तथैव च  ॥ ८.२९१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/291_Chinna-nAsye_bhagna-yuge.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.290-294)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.290].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

छिन्न-नास्ये भग्न-युगे  
तिर्यक्-प्रतिमुखागते ।  
अक्ष-भङ्गे च यानस्य  
चक्र-भङ्गे तथैव च  ॥ ८.२९१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

291	When the nose-string is snapped, when the yoke is broken, when the carriage turns sideways or back, when the axle or a wheel is broken,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/292_Chedane_chaiva.md">
<details open><summary><h3>292 छेदने चैव ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

छेदने चैव यन्त्राणां  
योक्त्र-रश्म्योस् तथैव च ।  
आक्रन्दे चाऽप्य् अपैहीति  
न दण्डं मनुर् अब्रवीत्  ॥ ८.२९२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/292_Chedane_chaiva.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When there is snapping of the nose-string, when the yoke is broken, when it turns sideways or backwards, when the axle breaks, and when the wheel is broken; (291) when the fittings or the yoking strap or the bridle are torn, and when there has been the loud cry ‘get out of the way,’—there is no punishment; so has Manu declared—(292)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

नासायां भवं **नास्यम्** । "शरीरावयवाद् यत्" (पाण् ५.१.६) । नासिकापुटसंयोगिनी बलीवर्दानां रज्जुर् अश्वानां खलीनं हस्तिनाम् अङ्कुशः । तस्मिन् **छिन्ने** त्रुटिते । **युगे** च **भग्ने** । रथाङ्गकाष्ठं युगम् । छिन्नं नास्यम् अस्येति बहुवृईहिणा रथ उच्यते, पशुर् वा, उभयोर् अपि साक्षात् पारंपर्येण संबन्धात् । **तिर्यक्प्रतिमुखागते** याने, तिर्श्चीनं वा प्रतीचीनं वा कथंचिद् भूवैषम्यात् पशुत्रासाद् वा यानं गच्छत्[^२५४] कथंचिद् अपराध्येन् न दुष्येत् । प्राजको हि संमुखीणाञ् छक्तो रक्षितुं तिर्यक् प्रत्यगवस्थितौ त्व् अदृश्यमानस्य कथं शक्तो रक्षितुम्[^२५५] । प्रतिमुखागतं प्रत्यगावृत्तिः ।


[^२५५]:
M G kathaṃ rakṣituṃ; J: kathaṃ rakṣatu


[^२५४]:
M G DK (1: 1808): gacchet

<u>अन्ये</u> तु तिर्यगागते हिंस्यमाने ऋजुगामिन्य् एव याने न[^२५६] दोषम् आहुः । प्रतिमुखं चाभिमुखं मन्यन्ते । अभिमुखागतः किम् इति चक्रिणं दृष्ट्वा पन्थानं न ददाति ।   
**अक्षचक्रे** रथाङ्गे प्रसिद्धे । **यन्त्राणि** चर्मबन्धनानि शकटकाष्ठानाम् । **योक्त्रं** पशुग्रीवाकाष्ठम्। **रश्मिः** प्रग्रहो हस्तवध्रिः[^२५७] युग्यानां संचरणनियमनार्थः । **आक्रन्द** उच्चैः शब्दो **ऽपेहीत्य्** अपसरेत्य् अर्थः । **इति**करणो भाषाप्रसिद्धतदर्थशब्दोच्चारणार्थः, न त्व् अयम् एव शब्दः प्रयोक्तव्यः । अविधेयेषु युग्येष्व् अपसरापसरेति क्रोशतः प्राजकस्य पथो नातिक्रामन् यदि हिंस्यान् न दोषः ॥ ८.२९१–९२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 8.291-292)  
**

The text proceeds to show the cases where there is no offence.

‘*Nāsya*’ is that which pertains to the nose; the term ending in the
affix ‘*yat*,’ which is added because the basic noun ‘*nāsā*’ is the
name of a limb of the body. It stands for the string that passes through
the nostrils of the bullocks, as also for the *bridle* of the horse, or
the *goad* of the elephant—When this has ‘*snapped*.’

‘*When the yoke is broken*’;—‘yoke’ is the name of a piece of wood
forming part of the cart. The compound ‘*chinnanāsyā*,’ taken as
*Bahuvrīhi*, refers to the cart or to the animal, both of these being
connected with it, either directly or indirectly.

‘*When it turns sideways or backwards*,’—*i.e*., when the cart so turns.
When, either on account of the uneven ground, or by reason of the animal
having taken fright, the cart turns either sideways or backwards, and
some one happens to be hurt,—there lies no offence. The driver can sec
and guard against things only in front of him; so that when the cart
turns sideways, how can ho sec and avoid striking against anything that
may be there?

‘*Turning backwards*’ means *turning round*.

Others explain this phrase to mean that no offence lies in a case where
the injured party has turned sideways, while the cart is going on its
straight course; and ‘*pratimukha*’ they explain as ‘in front.’ The
reason for there being no offence in this case is that it is the fault
of the injured person himself why he did not make way for the cart
coining in front of himself.

‘*Axle*’ and ‘*wheel*’ are well known parts of the cart.

‘*Fittings*’— the leather thongs with which the wooden parts of the
chariot are tied up.

‘*Yoking strap*’— the piece of wood on the neck of the animal.

‘*Bridle*’—the string with which the movements of the yoked animals are
controlled.

‘*Loud cry*’—‘*get out of the way*’—*i.e*., move off. When the animals
have gone out of hand, if the driver keeps on crying ‘get out of the
way,’ if some one coming by that way happens to be hurt, the fault does
not lie with the driver.—(291-292)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 8.291-292)  
**

These verses are quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 863);—in *Mitākṣarā* (p. 299),
to the effect that the man is not liable to punishment as the damage is
not due to any act of his. *Bālambhaṭṭī* notes that under the ten
circumstances here enunciated, neither the owner nor the driver of the
chariot deserves any punishment;—the adjectives ‘*chinnanāsye*’ etc.,
refer to the bullocks or other animals yoked to the chariot,—the
‘*yuga*’ is a piece of wooden pole,—if the piece of wood inside the
wheel should happen to be broken on account of the unevenness of the
road,—if the ropes with which the several parts of the chariot are bound
should be snapped,—similarly on the snapping of the yoking-strap or the
reins,—the ‘*yoktra*’ being the yoking-strap with which the shaft is
tied to the back of the bullock,—the tenth circumstance is that when the
driver or some one in the chariot has been crying aloud ‘turn aside’;—if
under any of these ten circumstances, the chariot should happen to do
damage to any living being or to any property, the driver and the rest
are not liable to any punishment.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 281), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Chinnānasye*,’ the string connected with the nostrils
snapping,—‘*bhinnayuge*’, the wooden yoking-shaft breaking,—movement
caused by something coming up either sideways on in front, *i.e*., if by
reason of something else coming up sideways, or in front, the chariot
should be turned aside and thereby do damage, there is to be no
punishment,—‘*akṣa*’ is the piece of wood in the wheel (the
axle),—‘*yantrāṇām*’, the thongs with which the yoking shaft is tied
up,—‘*raśmi*’, the reins,—if the driver or some one else calls out
loudly ‘move off’, and yet disregarding the warning, some one comes too
near the chariot and becomes hurt, then the driver and others are not to
be punished.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 290), to the effect
that in a case where the hurt is caused by some one who is helpless in
the matter, he is not to be punished.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.290-294)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.290].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

छिन्ननास्य बलीवर्दे युग्ये भग्नयुगे च तस्मिन्न् एव तिर्यगागते प्रतिमुखागते च याने अक्षभङ्गचक्रभङ्गयोश् च । एवं योक्त्ररश्म्योः, आक्रन्दे चाप्य् अपैहीति, एषु दशसु निमित्तेषु न दण्डः कार्यो राज्ञा यानस्वामिप्रभृतीनाम् । एभ्यस् त्व् अन्यत्रैषाम् अपराधहेतुर् उच्यते, मनुष्यादिहिंसायां वक्ष्यमाणदण्डार्थः ॥ ८.२९०–९१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

292	When the leather-thongs, the rope around the neck or the bridle are broken, and when (the driver) has loudly called out, 'Make way,' Manu has declared (that in all these cases) no punishment (shall be inflicted).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/293_yatrA-pavartate_yugyam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>293 यत्राऽपवर्तते युग्यम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यत्राऽपवर्तते युग्यं  
वैगुण्यात् प्राजकस्य तु ।  
तत्र स्वामी भवेद् दण्ड्यो  
हिंसायां द्विशतं दमम्  ॥ ८.२९३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/293_yatrA-pavartate_yugyam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.290-294)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.290].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अकुशले प्राजके स्वामिनो ऽपराधः, तत्प्रयुक्तत्वात् प्राजकस्य । द्विशतग्रहणं चात्र न विवक्षितम् । येन दण्डहेतोर् अपराधस्य प्रकरणम् इदम् । मनुष्यादिहिंसादण्डस्य वक्ष्यमाणस्य तं हि प्राणविशेषाश्रयं तधिंसायां वक्ष्यति, "मनुष्यमारणे क्षिप्रं चोरवत् किल्बिषं भवेत्" इति । तथा चेदं क्षुद्रपश्वाश्रयं तत्रैव प्रकरणे विशेषदण्डं वक्ष्यति "क्षुद्रकाणां पशूनां तु हिंसायां द्विशतो दमः" इति । यत एवम् अविवक्षित्वैतद् उक्तं द्विशतग्रहणम् ॥ ८.२९२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

293	But if the cart turns off (the road) through the driver's want of skill, the owner shall be fined, if damage (is done), two hundred (panas).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/294_prAjakash_ched.md">
<details open><summary><h3>294 प्राजकश् चेद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

प्राजकश् चेद् भवेद् आप्तः  
प्राजको दण्डम् अर्हति ।  
युग्यस्थाः प्राजके ऽनाप्ते  
सर्वे दण्ड्याः शतं शतम्  ॥ ८.२९४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/294_prAjakash_ched.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When however, on account of the driver’s ineptitude, the cart turns off and causes injury, the owner shall be punished with a fine of two hundred.—(293) If the driver is a trained one, it is he that should be punished; if the driver is untrained, all the occupants of the cart should be fined a hundred each.—(294)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**प्राजको** यानसारथिस् तस्य **वैगुण्यम्** अशिक्षितत्वम्, न तु प्रमादः । प्रमादे हि शिक्षितस्य स्वामिनो न दोषः । तस्माद् धेतोर् यदि **युग्यं** यानं[^२५८] सहश्**आपवर्तते** स्पष्टं मार्गं हित्वा तिर्यक् पश्चाद् वा गच्छेद् गतं च[^२५९] किंचिन् नाशयेत् **तत्र स्वामी दण्ड्यः** । अशिक्षितः प्राजकः किम् इत्य् आरोपितः । "मनुष्यमारणे क्षिप्रम्" (म्ध् ८.२९६) इत्यादिवक्ष्यमाणेन प्राणिभेदेन द्रव्यभेदेन च दण्डान्तरविधानाद् **द्विशतम्** इत्य् अविवक्षितम्[^२६०] । दण्डनिमित्तम् एतद् इत्य् एतावतैव वाक्यस्यार्थत्वाद् उत्तरत्र न कश्चिद् अन्यो ऽर्थः श्रूयते येन वाक्यं तत्र संख्याविधयकम् इत्य् उच्यते ॥ ८.२९३–९४ ॥


[^२६०]:
M G: iti vivakṣati; DK: (na?) vivakṣitam


[^२५९]:
M G gavāṃ ca; J omit: gataṃ ca


[^२५८]:
M G DK omit: yānaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 8.293-294)  
**

‘*Driver*’—the man who drives the cart; his ‘*ineptitude*’ consists in
his being not trained. What is said here applies to the case where the
accident is due to this, and not to want of care; for when the driver is
a trained one, the punishment should fall on him, there being no fault
on the part of the master.

On account of the said ‘*ineptitude*,’ if the cart suddenly happens to
‘*turn off,’—i.e*., giving up the right path, swerves off either
sideways or backwards,—and should thereby cause some damage, the owner
should he fined for having employed an untrained driver.

In view of what is going to be said regarding the case ‘when a man is
killed’ (296), where diverse penalties are prescribed in accordance with
the nature of the living being injured or article damaged,—significance
cannot be attached to what is said in the present verse regarding the
fine being ‘two hundred’; all that is meant by the declaration is that
the case cited is one calling for punishment; specially as there is
nothing else (apart from the specific cases mentioned below) to which
the exact amount of fine here laid down may he taken as
applicable.—(293-294)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verse 8.293)**

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 863), which explains ‘*prājaka*’
as the *driver* and ‘*swāmi*’ as the man riding in the chariot;—in
*Smṛtitattva* (p. 530), which explains the meaning to be that, in a case
where the chariot goes astray on account of the inefficiency of the
driver, and causes hurt to some one, a fine of 200 should be imposed on
the owner of the chariot for the offence of having engaged an inept
driver;—in *Bālambhaṭṭī* (2.299) which adds the same explanation as the
one just given;—and in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 282), which adds the
following notes:—In a case where the owner of the chariot has employed
an inefficient driver, and the horses go astray by reason of the
driver’s inefficiency, and if there be any damages caused by this, then
the owner should be fined 200.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 1041).

**(verse 8.294)**

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 282), to the effect that
in a case where the driver is efficient, the punishment shall be
inflicted upon him; and it explains ‘*āptaḥ*’ as ‘fully expert’;—and in
*Mitākṣarā* (2.300) which adds, that if the owner employs an expert
driver, then it is the driver that is to be punished, not the owner;—and
in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 1042).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.290-294)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.290].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

कुशले प्राजके प्रा[जक एव दण्ड्यः । युग्यस्था]स् तु युग्यस्वामिप्रभृतिर्, यानास्वामिनो ऽपि सन्तः, अकुशले सति प्रत्येकं शतं शतं दण्ड्या भवेयुः । येन [प्राजको] ऽनाप्तः युग्यस्वामिनां देशान्तरा[दिगमनाय प्र]युक्तः, नान्यथा । शतं दण्डत्वं चाविवक्षितम् इति कृतव्याख्यानम् एतत् ॥ ८.२९३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

294	If the driver is skilful (but negligent), he alone shall be fined; if the driver is unskilful, the occupants of the carriage (also) shall be each fined one hundred (panas).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/295_sa_chet.md">
<details open><summary><h3>295 स चेत् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

स चेत् तु पथि संरुद्धः  
पशुभिर् वा रथेन वा ।  
प्रमापयेत् प्राणभृतस्  
तत्र दण्डो ऽविचारितः  ॥ ८.२९५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/295_sa_chet.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But if he happens to be stopped on the road and causes the death of a living being, either through animals or through the cart,—in such a case there is no doubt regarding punishment.—(295)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तो हिंसायां दमः । तत्र विशेषं वक्तुम् इदम् आह । **स** प्राजकः **पथि संरुद्धो** ऽग्रजघनावसर्पिणा **संरुद्धो** निरुद्धगतिः पश्चात्स्थितेन असुशिक्षितत्वात् प्रमादाद् वा वेगेन धुर्याश् चोदिताः पुनः स्थिरयतश् चेन् निकटो रथस् तेन च तस्य वेगनिरोधे कृते यदि पुरोरथस्थावेगपातात् **पशुभी** रथयुक्तैर् अश्वादिभिः **रथेन** रथावयवैर् वा प्राणिनो मनुष्यादीन् मारयेत् ततो दण्डस्य विचारो नास्ति । स्थित एव दण्डः ।

- अथ वा जवोत्पतिता अश्वाः पथि संरोधकसंमुखीनरथदर्शनेन बलाद् विधार्यमाणास् तिर्यग्गत्या गच्छेयुः पार्श्वकीयान्[^२६१] प्रत्यगवस्थितत्वात् तथा हन्युस् तत्र दण्डो विचारितो नास्ति, प्राजके दोषाभावात् ।


[^२६१]:
M G: pārśvakīyāḥ

अथ वा पथि स्थितो[^२६२] वर्तमानः, संरुद्धो न विध्रियमाणः,[^२६३] विचारितो विशेषेण विहितो विशेषित इति यावत्[^२६४] ॥ ८.२९५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Penalty for causing hurt has been described; the text proceeds to lay
down details regarding it.

If ‘*he*’—the driver—‘*happens to be stopped*’—his movement
obstructed—‘*on the road*’— by some dense mass coming in front of him;
while thus placed behind that mass, either on account of carelessness,
or by reason of being untrained, he continues to urge forward the
animals yoked to his cart, and then suddenly pulls them up,—another cart
happens to be close hy,—then, by the sudden stoppage of the speed of his
cart, he happens to cause the death of men or other living
beings,—either through the ‘animals’—horses or others—yoked to the other
cart,—or ‘*through the cart*’ itself, or through some parts of it;—in
such a case ‘*there is no doubt regarding the punishment*,’ punishment
is certain.

Or, when the fast-running horses, on being suddenly pulled up, at the
sight of some obstacle in front, turn off sideways and kill the men that
may be there on one side, or behind the cart,—then in such a case
‘*there is no doubt regarding punishment*,’—*i.e*. there is no
punishment at all; and this for the simple reason that there is no fault
of the driver in this case.

Or, the words may he construed to mean that—when the cart is ‘*on the
road*’—*i.e., standing on the road*;—or ‘*stopped*’—*i.e., pulled
up*—then in such a case the punishment is ‘*vicāritaḥ*’ (this being the
reading in place of ‘*avicāritaḥ*’), *i.e*., specially prescribed.—(295)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 282), which explains the
meaning to be that in a case where being inefficiently driven by the
driver, the chariot happens to be obstructed on the road by another
chariot or by an animal, and thereby causes hurt to a living being, the
punishment is to be inflicted on the driver, ‘*avicāritaḥ*,’ most
surely.

It is quoted in ‘*Bālambhaṭṭī*’ on 2.300.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.295-298)**

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 284).—‘If any animal happen to be
killed, the man should be made to pay a fine according to the character
of the animal killed, and the value of the animal to its owner.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.50-54).—‘He who kills domestic animals shall pay a fine of
100 *kārṣāpaṇaṣ*;—he shall make good their value to the owner; be who
kills wild animals shall pay 500 *kārṣāpaṇas*; a killer of birds or
fish, ten *kārṣāpaṇas*; a killer of insects, one *kārṣāpaṇa*.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अना]प्ताद् वाज्ञानात् संरोधादिदोषात् पशुभिर् वा संमुखीनरथयुक्तैः संरोद्धृभिः रथेन वा जघनोपसर्पिणा संरुद्धयुग्यस् संनि[हि]तश् चामुत्[अश् च परिपात्]आदिभिः कारणैः तत्र दण्डनिमित्तो ऽप्राधो दण्ड इत्य् उच्यते । गुणतः स विचारितो ऽनन्तरम् एव । यानस्वाम्यादीनां "यत्रापवर्तते युग्यम्" इत्य् एवमादिना वाक्ये[ष्व् अ]त्र दण्डो विचारितः । वक्ष्यमाणश्लोकेषु यानस्वाम्यादीनाम् अनन्तरोक्तेश्व् अपराधेषु युग्यावर्तनादिभिः कारणैर् मनुष्यादिमारणे वक्ष्यमाणो "मनुष्यमारणे क्षिप्रम्" इत्य् एवमादिः । न त्व् अविशेषेण मनुष्यादिप्राणिहिंसाया दण्डः । किं तर्हि विचारितः नानाप्रकार उपदिष्टः मनुष्यादिहिंसाविशेषाख्यः । अथ वा पशुरथग्रहणं नैव स्वयानसंरुद्ध्विशेषणं यथा व्याख्यातम् अस्माभिः, किं तर्हि पशुभिर् वा बलीवर्धाख्यैर् आत्मीयरथयुक्तैः रथेन वा आत्मीयन् क्वचित् सङ्कुले इतश् चामुतश् च मार्गात् परिपतंस् तत्सङ्कटत्वाद् यदि ऽप्रमापयेत् प्राणभृतः तत्र दण्डो विचारितः" इत्य् एतद् उक्तार्थम् । इदानीं पूर्वापराधेषु प्राजकादीनां दण्डविकल्प उच्यते ॥ ८.२९४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

295	But if he is stopped on his way by cattle or by (another) carriage, and he causes the death of any living being, a fine shall without doubt be imposed.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/296_manuShyamAraNe_xipram.md">
<details open><summary><h3>296 मनुष्यमारणे क्षिप्रम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

मनुष्यमारणे क्षिप्रं  
चौरवत् किल्बिषं भवेत् ।  
प्राणभृत्सु महत्स्व् अर्धं  
गो-गजोष्ट्र-हयादिषु  ॥ ८.२९६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/296_manuShyamAraNe_xipram.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the case of a man being killed, on the spot, the guilt would be similar to that of the thief; and half of that in the case of the larger animals, such as cows, elephants, camels, horses and the like.—(296)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तादृशे प्राजके रथपशुभिर् मानुष्यश् चेन् मार्यते तदा **चौरवत् तस्य किल्बिषं**[^२६५] दण्डः । यद्य् अपि चौरस्य वधसर्वस्वहरणादयो[^२६६] दण्डास् तथापीह धनदण्ड एव गृह्यते न वधः, **महत्स्व् अर्धम्** इति तत्रैवार्धसंभवात् । स चोत्तमसाहसः कैश्चिद् अभ्युपगतः, यतश् च क्षते क्षुद्रकपशूनां तृतीयस्थानप्राप्तानां द्विशतो दमो ऽतः प्रथमस्थानां मुख्यानाम् उत्तमो युक्त इति । **प्राणभृतः** प्राणवन्तो मनुष्यतिर्यक्पक्ष्यादयः । **महत्सु** महत्त्वं गवां प्रभावतो हस्त्यादीनां प्रमाणतः । **आदि**ग्रहणाद् गर्दभाश्वतरव्याघ्रादयश् च कथंचित् परिगृह्यन्ते । 


[^२६६]:
     M G J: vadhaḥ sarva-


[^२६५]:
     M G add: vā

- वयं तु ब्रूमः- "सहस्रम्" इत्य् एवम् अवक्ष्यत् । यद्य् अन्ये चौरवद् दण्डा नाभिप्रेता[^२६७] अभविष्यन् । तस्माद् अर्धग्रहणाद् वधो[^२६८] मा भूद् धनदण्डास् तु सर्वस्वहरणादयः सर्वे चौरोक्ताः पुरुषापेक्षयातिदिश्यन्ते । 


[^२६८]:
     M G: dvedhā


[^२६७]:
     M G: daṇḍānāmabhipretā

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च मनुष्यमारणे ऽन्यस्य[^२६९] चौरदण्डस्यातिदेशो[^२७०] ऽयुक्तः[^२७१] । स प्रतिपदं मनुष्यहनने विहितः । स च "पुरुषाणाम् कुलीनानाम्" (म्ध् ८.३२३) इति वध एव । तत्र किम् इति वाक्यान्तरगतार्धशब्दानुरोधिनैवं[^२७२] व्याख्यायते । वरम् अर्धस्यैव गुणतः कदाचिद् वृत्तिर् आश्रीयताम् । 


[^२७२]:
     M G DK: -aiva


[^२७१]:
     M G DK: yuktaḥ (without the avagraha)


[^२७०]:
     M G: cauradaṇḍaḥ syād iti vyatideśo


[^२६९]:
     M G: kasya

<u>सत्यम्,</u> यद्य् अर्धशब्दो[^२७३] मारणेन संबध्यमानो ऽन्यथोपपद्येत[^२७४] । न च चौरवद् इत्य् अस्यानुषङ्गागतस्यार्थान्तरवृत्तिः पूर्वापरवाक्ययोः शक्या ॥ ८.२९६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If on account of the driver being in the position above described, a man
happens to be killed by the cart or by the animals yoked to it, then his
‘*guilt*’—*i.e*., his punishment—‘*would be* *similar to that of the
thief*.’

Though the punishment laid down for the thief is either ‘death’ or
‘confiscation of the entire property’ and so forth, yet in the present
context it is the *fine* that is meant, and not ‘death’; as is clear
from the words—‘*Half of that in the case of the larger animals*,’—
since it is only of the *fine* that there can be a ‘half.’

The ‘fine’ for the ‘thief’ has been held to be the ‘highest amercement,’
on the ground that the fine for killing smaller animals, which occupy
the third place in the scale—having been put down at ‘two hundred,’ it
is only right that in the case of human beings, who occupy the first
place in the scale, it should be the ‘highest amercement.’

‘*Animals*,’—living beings, such as man, beasts and birds,etc.

‘*Larger*’;—in the case of ‘cows,’ ‘largeness’ consists in their
superior quality, while in that of the elephant and other animals, it
consists in their size.

The phrase ‘*and the like*’ is meant to include the ass, the mule, the
tiger and others.

Our opinion on this point however is as follows:—If the other
punishments of the ‘thief’ were not meant to be applicable to the
present case, then the author would have simply mentioned ‘a thousand’
as the fine. The mention of the ‘*half*’ may justify the exclusion of
the penalty of ‘death’; but all the other penalties,—such as
‘confiscation of the entire property,’ and so forth—that have been
prescribed in the case of the thief,—must be taken as meant to be
applicable to the case of men.

“It cannot be right to apply to the case of man-killing any penalty
other than ‘death’; because under 8.323 below, it is clearly laid down
in so many words that ‘death’ shall be the penalty in the case of
killing a man. Under the circumstances, why should the other explanation
(whereby only the other penalties are made applicable) be accepted,
simply because the term ‘half’ happens to be used in another sentence?
It would be far better to attribute some other figurative meaning to the
term ‘half’ itself.”

This would be true if there were any other way of construing the term
‘half’ with ‘death.’ ‘Punishment similar to that of the thief’ having
been prescribed, it would not be right to take it to mean one thing
(*death*) in the first sentence and another thing (*fine*, etc.) in the
second.—(296)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 283), which adds the
following notes:—The term ‘*chauravat*’ indicates the fine that has been
prescribed in connection with the ‘highest amercement’,—and not
*mutilation or death*; as there could be no ‘half’ of the latter,—such a
half being prescribed in the latter part of the verse for causing hurt
to cows and such other animals.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 109);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 291);—and in *Mitākṣarā* (2.300), where *Bālambhaṭṭī*
adds the following noṭes:—If a man is killed by a chariot, going astray
by reason of the careless driver, then he at once becomes as great an
offender as a thief, and liable to be punished as a thief ‘*Kilviṣam*’
is another reading for ‘*kilviṣī*’; and the penalty meant here must be
the ‘highest amercement,’ not *death*, since the second half of the
verse speaks of the ‘half’ of the said penalty, by which ‘half a fine of
500 is meant, for the offence of killing such larger animals as the cow
and the like.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.295-298)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.295].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सत्य् अप्य् अविशेषाभिदाने **चोरवत्** किल्बिषे न वधः, किं तर्हि उत्तमसाहसो धनदण्डः । तथा च **प्राणभृत्सु महत्सु** प्रभावतः गवादिषु परिमाणतश् च हस्त्यादिष्व् अर्धदण्डम् आह, चोरवत्किल्बिषदण्डात् । स चार्धदण्डो धनदण्ड एवोत्तमसाहसे युज्यते पूर्वाभिहिते, न वधे । तथा च क्षुद्रकाणां पशूनां तु **हिंसायां** तृतीयस्थाने **द्विशतो दम** उच्यमान उत्तरश्लोके, प्रथमे स्थाने उत्तमसाहस (?) धनदण्डं दर्शयत्य् अत्र । एवं च सति **चोरवत् किल्बिष** उत्तमसाहस एव धनदण्डः, न वधो युज्यते । यदि चैतद् एवं भवति ततो "राजा स्तेनेन गन्तव्यः" इत्य् अत्र राजाभिगमने स्तेनस्योभयं युक्तम् इदम् "शासनाद् वा विमोक्षाद् वा" इति । स च मोक्षो धनदण्डेनैव युक्तः । तथा च कृत्वोत्तरो दण्डविधिर् अर्थवान् भवति । **आदि**ग्रहणं च हयादिष्व् इत्य् एतत् महिषादिविषयं विज्ञेयम् ॥ ८.२९५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

296	If a man is killed, his guilt will be at once the same as (that of) a thief; for large animals such as cows, elephants, camels or horses, half of that.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/297_xudrakANAm_pashUnAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>297 क्षुद्रकाणाम् पशूनाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

क्षुद्रकाणां पशूनां तु  
हिंसायां द्विशतो दमः ।  
पञ्चाशत् तु भवेद् दण्डः  
शुभेषु मृगपक्षिषु  ॥ ८.२९७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/297_xudrakANAm_pashUnAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of hurting petty animals, the fine is two h undred; and fifty in the case of the auspicious quadrupeds and birds.—(297)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अपचितपरिमाणाः[^२७५] **क्षुद्रकाः** । ते च केचिद् वयस्तः[^२७६] वत्सकिशोरककलभादयः । केचिज् जातिस्वभावतो ऽजैडकादयः । तत्राजाविकानां पञ्च माषान् वक्ष्यति । परिशेषाणां गवादीनाम् एवायं दण्डो ऽल्पपरिमाणानाम् । **शुभा** मृगाः पृष्टादयः,[^२७७] आकारतो लक्षणतश् च । **पक्षिणो** हंसशुकसारिकादयः । अशुभाः ककोलूकशृगालादयः[^२७८] । **पशु**शब्दश् चतुष्पाज् जातिवचनः । 


[^२७८]:
     M G: kakolūkaś ca śṛgālādayaḥ


[^२७७]:
     M G: mṛgāttapṛṣṭādayaḥ


[^२७६]:
     M G DK: vayasaḥ


[^२७५]:
     M G: apaṭhitaparimāṇāḥ

हिंसामात्रेण दण्डम् इमम् इच्छन्ति । न प्रकृतयानविधिहेतुं ब्रुवते । "तत्र दण्डो विचारितः" (म्ध् ८.२९५) इत्य् अनेनैव यानप्रकरणं व्यवच्छिन्नम् । विचारितः समाप्तविचार इत्य् अर्थः । इदानीम् एतत्प्रकरणनिरपेक्षम्[^२७९] उच्यत इति । एवं तु "प्राणभृत्सु महत्स्व् अर्धम्" इति हस्तादिच्छेदो न मारणम्[^२८०] इत्य् अर्धशब्दो नेयः स्मृत्यन्तरात् ॥ ८.२९७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Animals of small size are called ‘*petty*’; these may, in some cases, be
‘*petty*’ in age,—as in the case of the calf, the elephant-cub and. so
forth; and in others they may he ‘petty’ in quality,—as the ram and such
animals. As for the latter, the author is going to lay down ‘five
*māṣas*’ as the fine for killing goat and sheep. Hence the present text
must be taken as referring to the small-sized animals other than those
two.

‘*Auspicious quadrupeds*’ are the deer and similar animals; which are
‘*auspicious*’ in shape, as well as quality; and ‘*birds*,’ such as the
swan, the parrot and so forth. And the ‘inauspicious quadrupeds and
birds’ are the crow, the owl, the jackal and so forth.

The term ‘*paśu*’ here stands for *quadrupeds*.

People have held that the penalties laid down here refer to ‘hurt’ in
general, and not to ‘hurt’ caused by *conveyances*, which form the
subject-matter of the context. Because, it is contended, the treatment
of the subject of ‘hurt caused by conveyances’ was finished at verse
295,—where it was declared that the punishment (for hurt caused by
conveyances) has been ‘*vicāritaḥ*,’ which means that ‘its consideration
has been finished.’ And hence it is held that what is declared in the
present verse has no connection with that context.

Similarly under verse 290, in the sentence ‘half of that in the case of
the larger animals,’ the penalty spoken of as ‘half’ should, on the
strength of other *Smṛtis*, be taken as referring to the cutting off of
the hand or some such limb, which would he a minor form of ‘death’ (and
hence ‘half’).—(297)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.300), where *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds
the following notes:—‘*Kṣūdra-paśu*’ are smaller animals,—these
*smaller* ones being either in *age*, *e.g*., calves &c., or in
*quality*, *e.g*., goats &c. but it is the former that are meant here;
so that for the killing of a young calf the fine would be 200; in the
case of birds that are auspicious—in shape or in quality,—‘*mṛga*,’ the
*ruru*, the *pṛṣata* and other species of the deer,—birds, such as the
parrot, the swan and so forth,—the fine is 50.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 283), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Kṣudra*’ means *small*; and ‘smallness’ is of two kinds—due to
age, as in the case of the elephant cub, and due to quality, as in the
case of the goat and the like; the ‘*śubha mṛga*’ are the *Ruru*, the
*Pṛṣata* and so forth; and ‘*śubha*’ birds are the parrot and the like.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 109);—and in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 291).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.295-298)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.295].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अजाविकस्य पृथग्ग्रहणात् क्षुद्रपशुग्रहणम् अत्रान्यार्थम् । एवं चात्राल्पप्रयोजनानां गवादीनां दृष्टात् कारणात् ग्रहणम् । विकल्पार्थं वा स्यात् पुनर् अजाविकादीनाम् उत्तरश्लोके ग्रहणम् । **शुभाश्** च **मृगपक्षिणो** देवतायतनभूषणा रुरुमयूरप्रभृतयः अन्यपरिग्रहा वा ॥ ८.२९६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

297	For injuring small cattle the fine (shall be) two hundred (panas); the fine for beautiful wild quadrupeds and birds shall amount to fifty (panas).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/298_gardhabhAjAvikAnAn_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>298 गर्धभाजाविकानान् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

गर्धभाजाविकानां तु  
दण्डः स्यात् पञ्चमाषिकः [मेधातिथिपाठः - पाञ्चमाषिकः] ।  
माषिकस् तु भवेद् दण्डः  
श्व-सूकरनिपातने  ॥ ८.२९८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/298_gardhabhAjAvikAnAn_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of donkeys, goat and sheep the fine shall consist of five ‘māṣas’; and the fine shall be one ‘māṣa’ for the killing of a dog ok a pig.—(298)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पञ्च माषाः परिमाणम् अस्येति **पाञ्चमाषिकः** । माषस्य च द्रव्यजातेर् अनुपपादनान् मध्यमकल्पनायाश् च न्याय्यत्वाद् रौप्यस्य निर्देशो ऽयम् इत्य् आहुः । हिरण्यं तु युक्तम् । एवं तत्समम् इति न[^२८१] वाधिकं भवति । अनुबन्धाद्यपेक्षया तु द्रव्यजातिः कल्प्येति सिद्धान्तः ॥ ८.२९८ ॥


[^२८१]:
     M G: nāpi
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*pāñcamāṣika*’ means ‘that of which *five māṣas* is the
measure’; since the substance is not mentioned of which there shall be
‘five māṣas,’ the most reasonable conclusion is to take the mean,
*i.e*., a substance of medium quality; hence it is ‘*five māṣas*’ of
*silver* that is meant; so say some people.

But the right view is to take it as referring to *gold*; and in this
sense the present assertion does not militate against anything that has
been said before with regard to its being ‘equal to it’ (?)

The final conclusion is that the exact substance is to be determined in
accordance with the circumstances of each individual case.—(298)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p; 283), which notes that the
‘*māṣaka*’ is equal to two *kṛṣṇalas*, as declared by *Pārijāta*;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 291);—and in *Mitākṣarā* (2.300), where
*Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the following notes:—For the killing of a donkey, or
goat, or sheep, the fine consists in *silver*, 5 *Māsas* in weight, and
not *gold*, and for the killing of a dog or a pig, one *Māṣa* of silver.
It notes both the readings, ‘*pāñcamāṣikaḥ*... *māṣikaḥ*’ and
‘*pañcamāṣakaḥ...... māṣakaḥ*’.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.295-298)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.295].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**माषिक**ग्रहणेन चात्र द्रव्यग्रहणं पुरुषशक्त्यपराधानुबन्धसामर्थ्याद् विज्ञेयम् । विशेषतः सपरिग्रहप्राणिहिंसाविषयश् चायं दण्ड उच्यमानो यानोपघाताद् अन्यत्रापि कार्यसामान्याद् विज्ञायते ॥ ८.२९७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

298	For donkeys, sheep, and goats the fine shall be five mashas; but the punishment for killing a dog or a pig shall be one masha.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/299_bhAryA_putrash.md">
<details open><summary><h3>299 भार्या पुत्रश् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

भार्या पुत्रश् च दासश् च  
प्रेष्यो भ्रात्रा च सोदरः ।  
प्राप्तापराधास् ताड्याः स्यू  
रज्ज्वा वेणुदलेन वा  ॥ ८.२९९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/299_bhAryA_putrash.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The wife, the son, the slave, the servant and the uterine brother shall be beaten with a rope or a split bamboo, when they have committed a fault.—(299)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

प्राप्ता अपराधं **प्राप्तापराधाः** । **अपराधो** व्यतिक्रमः नीतिभ्रंशः । स यदा तैः कृतो भवति, तदा ताडयितव्याः । 

ताडनम् अपि हिंसेत्य् उक्तम् । सा च "न हिंश्याद् भूतानि" इति प्रतिषिद्धा, अपराधे निमित्ते भार्यादीनां प्रति-प्रसूयते । 

संबन्धि-शब्दाश् चैते ।  
या[^२८२] यस्य **भार्या** यश् च यस्य **दासः** स तेनानुशासनीयः ।  
मार्ग-स्थापनोपाय-विधि-परश् चायम्, न ताडन-विधिर् एव ।  
तेन वाग्दण्डाद्य् अपि कर्तव्यम् ।+++(5)+++ अपराधानुरूपेण कदाचित् ताडनम् । 

**सोदर**-स्थाने कनीयान् पठितव्यः- **भ्राता** **तथानुजः** । स हि ज्येष्ठस्य पुत्रवत् ताडनार्हः । वैमात्रेयो ऽपि चेद् अपितृको गुणवज्-ज्येष्ट-तन्त्रश् च । सो ऽप्य् उन्मार्गगामी ताडनादि-पर्यन्तैर् उपायैर् निवारणीयः । 

**वेणुदलं** वंश-त्वक् । एतद् अप्य् उपलक्षणम्- तथा-विधानां मृदु-पीडा-साधनानां शिफादीनाम्[^२८३] ॥ ८.२९९ ॥


[^२८३]:
     M G: śiṣyādīnām


[^२८२]:
     M G DK (1: 1812) omit: yā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Prāptāparādhāḥ*,’—those who have fallen upon, committed, a fault.
‘*Fault*’ means *transgression of morality*; when any such has been
committed by them, they should he beaten.

As a matter of fact, beating is a form of *hurt*, and as such is
forbidden by the general law—‘no living beings shall be injured’; but an
exception to this is made in the case of transgressions by the wife and
other persons.

All these are relative terms; hence the meaning is that the wife is to
be chastised by him whose wife she is, the slave is to be chastised by
him who is his master, and so forth.

What is enjoined here is the method of keeping the persons on the right
path, and not actual beating; so that chastisement may be administered
verbally; and in cases where the fault is serious, there may also be
beating.

In the place of ‘*uterine*’ we should read ‘*younger*,’ and the right
reading would thus be ‘*bhrātā tathānujaḥ*’; since it is the younger
brother that may be chastised by his elder brother, like a child. The
half-brother also is under the tutelage of the elder brother, if the
latter is a duly qualified person; hence he also, if he takes to the
wrong path, should be prevented by all the methods, ending with
*beating*,

‘*Split bamboo*’—the bark of the bamboo. This has been mentioned only as
illustrative of the lotus-fibre and other such objects which cause only
slight pain.—(299)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

[*Cf*.
4.164.]

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 271), which explains that
the *younger* ‘brother’ is meant;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p.
514);—in *Aparārka* (p. 610, and also p. 817);—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (pp. 572 and 919);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p.
52);—in *Samskāraratnamālā* (p. 314), which says that the specific
mention of the ‘uterine’ brother indicates that the half-brother shall
not be beaten;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 142), which says
that this beating should be done only when the boy proves intractable to
chiding and other means;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 76).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.299-301)  
**

*Gautama* (2.42-44).—‘As a rule, a pupil shall not be punished
corporally,—if no other course is possible, he may be corrected with a
thin rope or a thin cane; if the teacher strikes him with any other
thing, he should be punished by the King.’

*Āpastamba* (1.8.28-29).—‘If the pupil commits faults, the teacher shall
always reprove him;—frightening, fasting, bathing in cold water and
expulsion from the teacher’s presence are the punishments to be
employed, according to the seriousness of the fault, until the pupil
leaves off the mischief.’

*Yama* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 2.).—‘Wife, son, slave, slave-girl and
pupil,—when these commit a fault, they should be chastised with a rope
or with split bamboo; but in the lower, never in the higher, parts of
the body:—if one strikes them otherwise, he should be punished.’

*Nārada* (*Do*.).—‘If the pupil does not obey the teacher, he should be
chastised, without hurting him, either with a thin rope or with split
bamboo; the teacher shall not beat him much, nor in the head or on the
chest. Behaving otherwise than this, the teacher should be punished by
the King.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

दण्डप्रतिषेधर्थो ऽयम् आरम्भः, ताडनासादननियमार्थश् च ॥ ८.२९८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

299	A wife, a son, a slave, a pupil, and a (younger) brother of the full blood, who have committed faults, may be beaten with a rope or a split bamboo,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/300_pRShThatas_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>300 पृष्ठतस् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पृष्ठतस् तु शरीरस्य  
नोत्तमाङ्गे कथं चन ।  
अतो ऽन्यथा तु प्रहरन्  
प्राप्तः स्याच् चौरकिल्बिषम्  ॥ ८.३०० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/300_pRShThatas_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But only on the back part of the body, and never on the upper part; he who strikes otherwise than this incurs the guilt of a thief.—(300)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तताडनदेशसाधनाभ्याम्[^२८४] अन्येन प्रकारेण घ्नन्न् अक्षादिषु लगुडादिभिर् वा चौरदण्डं[^२८५] प्राप्नोति । निन्दैषा । न त्व् अयम् एव दण्डः । यो ऽन्यत्र हिंसाया दण्डः सो ऽत्र भवतीत्य् उक्तं भवति ॥ ८.३०० ॥


[^२८५]:
     M G add: na


[^२८४]:
     M G DK: uktatāḍanasādhanābhyām
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

He who strikes with things other than those specified—*i.e*., with a
stick or such things—or on a part of the body other than those
mentioned,—*i.e*., on the eye, etc.—‘*incurs the guilt of a thief*.’

This is only meant to be deprecatory of the act referred to; and is not
the injunction of an actual punishment; so that in this case also the
penalty shall be the same as that in other oases of ‘hurt.’—(300)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 514);—in
*Aparārka* (p. 610), which explains that ‘*kilviṣam*’ means ‘an offence
deserving punishment’;—again on p. 817, where ‘*kilviṣam*’ is explained
as ‘punishment’;—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 271), which explains
‘*pṛṣṭhataḥ*’ as ‘not in a vital part,’ and ‘*uttamāṅge*’ also as ‘in a
vital part’;—in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 530);—in *Mitākṣarā* (2.32), in
support of the view that, if, in a fit of passion, the Teacher should
strike the pupil in a vital part of the body, and the boy should
complain before the king, then it becomes an admissible suit;—in
*Vyavahāra-Balambhaṭṭī* (pp. 572 and 919);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, 47b);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 52) to the effect that no one
should be struck on the head;—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p, 315), which
says that ‘*uttamāṅga*’ means ‘head’;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p.
142);—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 76).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.299-301)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.299].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

इत्य् अयं नियमस्य व्यतिक्रमे ताडयितुं विज्ञेयः । न चावश्यताडनम् एतेषाम् अपराधिनां पुत्रादीनाम्, नियमार्थत्वाद् उपदेशस्य । **प्राप्तः स्याच् चोरकिल्बिषम्** इत्य् अयं नियमव्यतिक्रमे निन्दार्थवादो निवृत्त्यर्थः । एवं च सत्य् **अतो ऽन्यथा** ताडने नियमातिक्रममात्रम्, न तु चोरवद् दण्ड्यः । धिग्दण्डवाग्दण्डमात्रं वा, तत्र तत्सामान्यात् ॥ ८.२९९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

300	But on the back part of the body (only), never on a noble part; he who strikes them otherwise will incur the same guilt as a thief.
</details>
</details>
</div>

## 301-350
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/301_eSho.akhilenA-bhihito.md">
<details open><summary><h3>301 एषो ऽखिलेनाऽभिहितो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एषो ऽखिलेनाऽभिहितो  
दण्डपारुष्यनिर्णयः ।  
स्तेनस्याऽतः प्रवक्ष्यामि  
विधिं दण्डविनिर्णये  ॥ ८.३०१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/301_eSho.akhilenA-bhihito.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Thus has the law relating to physical assault been fully explained; after this I am going to expound the law for the regulating of punishments in cases of theft.—(301)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**एष** निःशेषेणोक्तो **दण्डपारुष्यनिर्णयो** निर्णयो[^२८६] दण्डव्यवस्था । दण्डशब्दो हि साधनोपलक्षकतया विवादपदे[^२८७] ऽन्वितार्थः । नामधेये पूर्वपदम् । **स्तेनस्य** चौरस्य दण्डभेदान् अतः परं **वक्ष्यामीत्य्** उपसंहारोपन्यासार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.३०१ ॥


[^२८७]:
     M G: vivāde pade


[^२८६]:
     M G J omit: nirṇayo
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*The law relating to assault*’—the rules regarding punishments—has been
fully *explained*. The term ‘*daṇḍa*’ as occurring in the name of the
‘head of dispute’ (*daṇḍapāruṣya*), has been used as indicating the
weapon of assault (*stick*).

After this I am going to expound the several kinds of penalties to be
inflicted on the thief.

This verse serves the purpose of introducing the next head.—(301)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 286).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.299-301)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.299].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उपसंहा]रोपन्यासार्थः श्लोकः । मा भूच् च पूर्वैर् अपराधस्य तुल्यत्वम् इत्य् अतो गुरुत्वाद् अस्य तन्निग्रहादरार्थम् इदम् आह ॥ ८.३०० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

301	Thus the whole law of assault (and hurt) has been declared completely; I will now explain the rules for the decision (in cases) of theft.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/302_paramaM_yatnam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>302 परमं यत्नम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

परमं यत्नम् आतिष्ठेत्  
स्तेनानां निग्रहे नृपः ।  
स्तेनानां निग्रहाद् अस्य  
यशो राष्ट्रं च वर्धते  ॥ ८.३०२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/302_paramaM_yatnam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The King shall, make the best efforts for suppressing thieves; by the suppression of thieves comes fame and the kingdom prospers.—(302)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कश्चित् करुणावान् "क्रूरं हिंसाकर्म" इति मन्यमानो न प्रवर्तते । अतस् तत्प्रवृत्त्यर्थं[^२८८] स्तेननिग्रस्तुत्यर्थवादः प्रक्रम्यते । नात्र हिंसादोषो ऽस्ति, प्रत्युत दृष्टोपकारहेतुत्वात्[^२८९] स्तेनहिंसैव श्रेयस्करी । वेदतुल्यतां च ख्यापयितुम् अर्थवादा भूयांसः । तत्र हि प्रायेण सार्थवादका[^२९०] विध्युद्देशा इति । तत्प्रतीत्यनुसरणेन वैदिको ऽयम् अर्थ इति प्रसिद्धिः । भवन्ति चत्र केचित् प्रतिपत्तारो ये स्तुतिभिर् अतितरां[^२९१] प्रवर्तन्ते ।


[^२९१]:
     M G: ititarāṃ


[^२९०]:
     M G: sarvārthavādakā


[^२८९]:
     M G: dṛṣṭādṛṣṭopakārahetutvāt


[^२८८]:
     M G: tatpratipattyarthaṃ

**परं यत्नं** प्रकृष्टम् अतिशयवत् तात्पर्यम् आश्रयेत् । चरैश् चारयेत् साक्षात् प्रकाशं चातिप्रयत्नतः । **स्तेनाश्** चौराः । **निग्रहो** नियमनवधबन्धनादिः[^२९२] । एवं कृते **यशः** ख्यातिर् भवति । निरुपद्रवो ऽस्य राज्ञो देशः, स्तेना नाभिभवन्ति, निषा दिवातुल्या तत्र, इति सर्वत्र स्थितं भवति । **राष्ट्रं वर्धते** । राष्ट्रं जनपदस् तस्मिन् निवासिनश् च पुरुषाश् चौरैर् अनुपद्रूयमाणा वर्धन्ते । श्रीभिः प्रमोदमाना बहुपर्यन्तदेशान्तरस्था[^२९३] अपि निरुपद्रवं राष्ट्रम् आश्रयन्ते । ततो वर्धते ॥ ८.३०२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It is possible that a certain king may be too merciful and hence not
undertake the work of suppressing thieves, regarding it to be a cruel
act of injury; hence with a view to prompt such a king to do his duty,
the text puts forward a valedictory passage appraising the suppression
of thieves. The meaning is that the act of punishing thieves does not
involve anything wrong in the way in which the ‘injury of living beings’
does; on the contrary, in the case of thieves, it is the act of
inflicting hurt on them which serves a visibly useful purpose and
enhances the fame of the king.

In the present work several purely valedictory passages have been
introduced with a view to indicate that it belongs to the same category
as the *Veda*, in which most of the injunctions are found to be
accompanied by valedictory passages; so that from similarity to this
latter, it would be thought that what is said in the text is sanctioned
by the Veda. Further, there are certain persons who become more quickly
prompted to a certain course of action by the force of valedictory
descriptions.

‘*Best efforts*’—He should have recourse to the bast and most vigilant
methods; employing spies to try their best to track them down directly
as well as openly.

‘*Stena*’ is *thief*.

‘*Nigraha, suppression*’ means *putting down* by such means as death,
imprisonment and the like.

If this is done, the king acquires ‘*fame*’, good name; all the people
saying—‘The kingdom of this king is free from troubles,—thieves do not
attack the people,—night is like day.’

‘*The kingdom prospers*.’—‘Kingdom’ means the *country*, and when its
inhabitants are not attacked by thieves, they prosper in wealth and
become affluent, and inhabitants of other countries also are attracted
to settle in this kingdom on account of its being free from troubles;
and thus also ‘*the kingdom prospers*.’—(302)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 293);—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 124).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.302-303)  
**

*Āpastamba* (2.25.15).—‘That King only takes care of the welfare of his
subjects in whose dominions, be it in villages or forests, there is no
danger from thieves.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.190).—‘A king in whose dominion there exists neither thief,
nor adulterer, nor calumniator, nor robber, nor murderer, attains the
world of Indra.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.335).—‘He should guard his people against the attacks
of calumniators, thieves, evil-doers, and great criminals,—specially
those of Kāyasthas.’

*Hārīta* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 294).—‘If in the dominion of a king wicked
thieves prosper, that evil, reaching large proportions, destroys the
very roots of that king.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 256).—‘The King should
save his people from the ravages of prostitutes, talkers, evil-doers,
royal favourites, and specially, Kāyasthas.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

कथम् । जानपदानां हि कर्मणां वृत्त्यर्थानाम् अदृष्टप्रयोजनानां च सुकृतपरिपन्थिनिग्रहणम् । एवं च सति, इति ॥ ८.३०१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

302	Let the king exert himself to the utmost to punish thieves; for, if he punishes thieves, his fame grows and his kingdom prospers.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/303_abhayasya_hi.md">
<details open><summary><h3>303 अभयस्य हि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अभयस्य हि यो दाता  
स पूज्यः सततं नृपः ।  
सत्त्रं हि वर्धते तस्य  
सदैवाऽभय-दक्षिणम्  ॥ ८.३०३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/303_abhayasya_hi.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The King who imparts security is ever to be honoured; his sacrificial session constantly prospers, accompanied as it is by the gift of ‘security.’—(303)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अभयं** चौरादिभ्यो ऽधिकृतेभ्यश् चासद्दण्डनिवारणेन यो ददाति स सर्वदैव **पूज्यो** भवति, स्वैरकथास्व् अपि राज्याच् च्युतो वनस्थो ऽपि । **सत्त्रं** क्रतुविशेषो गवामयनादि । तद् अस्य **वर्धते** निष्पद्यते । सर्वाङ्गम् उत्पन्नम् एवंगुणम् इत्य् एतद् वर्धत इत्य् अनेनाह । अहरहः[^२९४] सत्त्रफलं प्राप्नोतीत्य् अर्थः । **अभयं** यत्र दक्षिणा । अन्येषु सत्त्रेषु दक्षिणा नास्ति । इदं तु सर्वेभ्यो ऽपि विशिष्टं यद् दक्षिणावत् । सा च गवाश्वादिदक्षिणाविलक्षणा[^२९५] इत्य् अर्थवान् सत्रव्यतिरेकः[^२९६] ॥ ८.३०३ ॥


[^२९६]:
     M G: dakṣiṇayā vatsagavāśvādibhir ye puṣyante tadarakṣāto rājñām adharmo yāvad ye haranti dakṣiṇāvilakṣaṇety arthavān satravyatirekaḥ


[^२९५]:
     DK (1: 1700): yad dakṣiṇā | vatsagavāśvādibhiḥ dakṣiṇāvilakṣaṇā (but DK 4: 707 has the reading adopted)


[^२९४]:
     M G J: anenāharahaḥ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Security*’—from thieves and such dangers, as also from his own
officers, who are prevented from inflicting undue punishments.—He who
‘*imparts*’ such security ‘*is to be honoured, ever*’; *i.e*., even in
ordinary conversation, and also when he happens to retire to the forest
on having lost his kingdom.

‘*Sacrificial session*,’—a particular form of sacrificial performance,
such as the *Gavāmayana* and the like—‘*prospers*’—becomes accomplished
in all its details; this is what is meant by the ‘prospering’ of the
sacrifice.

What is meant is that the king acquires every day the merit that is
obtained by the due performance of the sacrificial session.

‘*The gift of security*.’—In other sacrificial sessions there is no gift
or fee; the act here referred to however is superior to them all, in as
much as it is accompanied by a gift, and the gift too is not in the form
of cows and horses and the like, but of a totally different form; hence
it is only right that it should be regarded as superior to the
sacrificial session—(303).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 293), which adds that this
act is called ‘*Sattra*’ on the ground of its having to be done day
after day; and ‘*abhaya-dakṣinām*’ means ‘*Sattra* at which security is
the sacrificial fee’;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 124).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.302-303)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.302].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

येन सत्त्रं हि वर्धते तस्य तस्य न निग्रहरूपं सदैव यावज्जीवम् इत्य् अर्थः । न तु यथा वैताने नियतकालम् । तच् आस्य भवति अभयदक्षिणम्- सत्त्रे दक्षिणा[भावात् तद्वैलक्ष्यण्यम् अस्य सत्त्रस्य ॥ ८.३०२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

303	That king, indeed, is ever worthy of honour who ensures the safety (of his subjects); for the sacrificial session (sattra, which he, as it were, performs thereby) ever grows in length, the safety (of his subjects representing) the sacrificial fee.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/304_sarvato_dharmaShaDbhAgo.md">
<details open><summary><h3>304 सर्वतो धर्मषड्भागो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सर्वतो धर्मषड्भागो  
राज्ञो भवति रक्षतः ।  
अधर्माद् अपि षड्भागो  
भवत्य् अस्य ह्य् अरक्षतः  ॥ ८.३०४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/304_sarvato_dharmaShaDbhAgo.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

To the King who protects (his people) accrues the sixth part of the spiritual merit of all persons; and the sixth of their demerit also accrues to him, if he protects them not—(301).
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सर्वतः** प्रकाशाद्[^२९७] यज्ञादेः तथा ग्रामवासिभिः वनवासिभिश् च कृताद्[^२९८] धर्मषड्भागं[^२९९] राजा लभते । एवम् **अधर्माद्** **अपि** चौरैः प्रच्छन्नकृताद् राज्ञः षड्भागो भवति । न केवलं स्तेनैर् ये मुच्यन्ते तदरक्षातो राज्ञाम् अधर्मः, यावद् ये हरन्ति तेषाम् अपि चौर्यभावेनाधर्मोदयः, तदंशेनापि राजानः संबध्यन्ते तान्[^३००] अनिगृह्णन्तः[^३०१] । अदृष्टदोषसंबन्धनिवारणम् अपि रक्ष्याणां[^३०२] रक्षैव[^३०३] । तत्राधिकृतस्य[^३०४] राज्ञस् तदकरणाद् युक्तः प्रत्यवायः । 


[^३०४]:
     DK: adhikṛtasya (but not DK 4: 708)


[^३०३]:
     DK: rakṣaṇe (but not DK 4: 708)


[^३०२]:
     M G: rakṣāṇā


[^३०१]:
     M G: nigṛhṇataḥ; DK: nigṛhṇatāṃ


[^३००]:
     M G: tāni


[^२९९]:
     DK (1: 1700): dharmāt ṣaḍbhāgaṃ (But DK 4: 707 has dharmaṣaḍbhāgaṃ)


[^२९८]:
     M G: kṛtākṛtād


[^२९७]:
     DK (1: 1700: sakāśād (But DK 4: 707 has prakāśād)

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च भृतिपरिक्रीतत्वाद् धर्मषड्भागम्[^३०५] अयुक्तम् । 


[^३०५]:
     DK (4: 708): dharmaṣaḍbhāgavacanam

<u>उक्तं</u> दीनानाथप्रव्रजितादयः[^३०६] सन्त्य् अकरप्रदाः । परिपूर्णस्वधर्मपालने कानुपपत्तिः[^३०७] ॥ ८.३०४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The king obtains the sixth part of the spiritual merit arising from the
open performance of sacrifices by the inhabitants of villages, as well
as by those living in forests; so also the sixth part of the ‘demerit’
acquired by the secret acts of stealing and the like committed by
thieves and others. It is not only by his failure to protect those who
are robbed by thieves that the king incurs sin, but also by his failing
to suppress those who, by committing theft and such other misdeeds,
incur sin, a portion whereof falls upon the king. Because ‘protection’
also means saving them from the incurring of sin. So that if the king
fails in this duty of his, it is only right that he should incur sin.

“In as much as the protection rendered by the king is in return for what
he receives as wages (in the way of taxes), it is not right, to say that
he obtains the sixth part of the people’s spiritual merit.”

It has already been explained that there are many persons who pay no
taxes at all,—such as the poor, the orphans, the ascetics and so forth.
So that if the king fulfills his full duty, what incongruity is there in
the assertion made in the text?—(304)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“This is that famous ‘sixth’ of good or evil which the king draws upon
himself by protecting or neglecting his people; he revives a sixth of
the produce as tax (7.130), and in return, it may be, must give security
to the realm, or he gets the same proportion of the fruits of their bad
deeds; or (*cf*. verse 308) he takes all the sin of the world.
Yājñavalkya says (1.334-336) he takes one-sixth of the fruit of their
good deeds, but one half of their sin in case he does not protect them.
Similarly the sixth or the twelfth part (8. 35), or half (8.39) is the
share of the treasure the king receives; and again in 8.18 he receives a
fourth of the fruits of the sin caused by a wrong decision in
court.”—Hopkins, who refers to the Mahābhārata (13.61.34-35), where, in
regard to the sin, different views (fourth part, half, whole) are set
forth and then the conclusion stated in favour of the *fourth* part,
which, it is said, is in accordance with the ‘teaching of Manu.’

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 397);—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 255);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (p. 73p);—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 263).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.304-305)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (1.334).—‘Protecting the people according to law, the King
obtains the sixth part of the spiritual merit of the people.’

Do. (1.335).—‘Whatever sin is committed by the people not protected by
the King, half of it goes to the King; since he takes taxes from them.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1.44).—‘It has been declared in the Veda—“the King obtains
the sixth part of the merit of sacrifices and charitable works.”’

*Viṣṇu* (3.48).—‘A sixth part both of the virtuous deeds and of the
iniquitous acts committed by his subjects goes to the King.’

*Gautama* (11.11).—‘It is declared in the Veda that the King obtains a
share of the spiritual merit gained by his subjects.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti).—‘O Rāma, the King obtains
the sixth part of the virtuous as well as the iniquitous deeds committed
by his people; and also a portion of their spiritual merit, if he is
engaged in protecting them.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **सर्वतो] धर्मषड्भागो राज्ञो भवति रक्षतः ।**

**सर्वत** इत्य् आदेय वृत्तिभ्यो ऽपि सपरिग्रहेभ्यः, किं पुनर् इतरेभ्यः, यतो वृत्तिगन्धो ऽपि नास्ति । अथ वा स्मार्तत्वाद् अस्योपदेशस्य स्मृतिकर्म[विषये] षड्भागे प्राप्तम् इदं **सर्व**ग्रहणं करोति श्रुतिकर्मेभ्यः — तथा चानन्तरश्लोके वक्ष्यति, "यद् अधीते यद् यजते" इत्य् एवमादि । **रक्षतश्** चेद् **राज्ञो** धर्मषड्भागग्रहणम् । तेन हेतुविपर्यय इति कृत्वेदम् उच्यते-

> **अधर्माद् अपि षड्भागो भवत्य् अस्य ह्य् अरक्षतः  ॥ ८.३०३ ॥**

अथ वा रक्षायाम् अधिकृतस्य् स्वयंभुवा, योग्यताशास्त्रेण वा तस्याननुष्ठानाद् युक्तम् अधर्मषड्भागवचनम् इदं शिष्टस्याक्रियायाः, अभिषेककाले वा प्रजासंरक्षणमताक्रियायाः, अन्यार्थप्रतिज्ञाहानिवत् ॥ ८.३०४ ॥

_अधुना **सर्वतो धर्मषड्भाग** इत्य् एतत् सूत्रस्थानं विवृनोति ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

304	A king who (duly) protects (his subjects) receives from each and all the sixth part of their spiritual merit; if he does not protect them, the sixth part of their demerit also (will fall on him).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/305_yad_adhIte.md">
<details open><summary><h3>305 यद् अधीते ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यद् अधीते यद् यजते  
यद् ददाति यद् अर्चति ।  
तस्य षड्भागभाग् राजा  
सम्यग् भवति रक्षणात्  ॥ ८.३०५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/305_yad_adhIte.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When one reads the Veda, when one performs a sacrifice, when one makes gifts, when one worships,—to the sixth part of each of those the king becomes entitled, in consequence of properly protecting the people—(305).
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद् उक्तं "सर्वतः" (म्ध् ८.३०४) इति, तस्य[^३०८] प्रपञ्चो ऽयम् । अध्ययनादयो धर्मार्थतयान्यत्र ज्ञापिताः प्रसिद्धरूपाश् च । अर्चनं देवगुरूणां पूजनम् । **तस्ये**ति कर्मणो ऽध्ययनादेः पदार्थस्येति योजनीयम्, क्रियायाः स्त्रीलिङ्गत्वात् । **षड्भाग** इति[^३०९] । न च[^३१०] कर्तुः पञ्चकर्मफलांशात्[^३११] षष्ठो नृपतेः, समग्रकर्मफलभोक्तृत्वस्याधिकारतः कर्तुर् अवगतत्वात् । अपि तु **सम्यग्**ग्रहणात् स्वकर्मानुष्ठानात् तावन्मात्रं राज्ञः फलम् उत्पद्यत इति । नान्यकृतस्य शुभस्याशुभस्य वा अन्यत्र गमनम् । नाकर्तुः फलम् अस्तीति स्थितम् ॥ ८.३०५ ॥


[^३११]:
     DK (4: 708): pañca karmaphalāṃśāḥ


[^३१०]:
     M G omit: na ca


[^३०९]:
     M G add: vacanaṃ


[^३०८]:
     M G add: ca
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been said above that the merit ‘*of all persons*’ accrues to the
king; this same idea is elaborated in the present verse.

The reading of the Veda and the other acts are already known from other
sources as bringing merit.

‘*Worship*’—is the offering of worship to gods and to one’s superiors.

‘*Of each of thoae*’.—this should be construed with the term
‘*adhyayanādeḥ*’ ‘*padārthasya*’ (understood); since the term ‘*kriyā*’
would be feminine (and hence not construable with ‘*tasya*’).

‘*Sixth part*’;—this does not mean that ñvo parts of the fruit of the
act accrue to the doer, and the sixth to the king; because it is
understood that when the agent undertakes to do an act, he does it with
the motive of obtaining its whole fruit; nor can the merit or demerit of
an act done by one person accrue to another; as it is a settled fact
that the fruit of an act cannot accrue to any oue else except the doer
of it; hence what is meant is that the merit that accrues to the king
from his act of fulfilling his duty of protecting the people is equal in
amount to the said ‘*sixth part*’.—(305)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 254);—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 263).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.304-305)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.304].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सर्वक्रियानिदर्शनार्थत्वाच् चासां निर्दिष्टाभ्यो नेतराः परिसंख्यायेरन् । वेदस्मृतिशास्त्रन्यायविरोधाश् च मा भूवन्न् इति । अत एतं यथाश्रुतपरिकल्पनां परित्यज्य, **धर्मषड्भाग**ग्रहणं प्रनाडिकयार्थवादो नियमधर्मापेक्षः भवति, गुणवत्पुरुषसंरक्षणापेक्षो वा, तद् अपेक्षम् एतद् धर्मषड्भागग्रहणं प्रनाडिकयार्थवादार्थम् । न तु वृत्तिपरिक्रीतत्वाद् राज्ञो निर्बीजम् इदं प्ररोचनार्थमात्रार्थं भवितुम् अर्हति, असति धर्मसंभन्ध इति । इतश् च धर्मषड्भागग्रहणं राज्ञः प्रजासंरक्षणापेक्षम् ॥ ८.३०४ ॥

_यद् आह ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

305	Whatever (merit a man gains by) reading the Veda, by sacrificing, by charitable gifts, (or by) worshipping (Gurus and gods), the king obtains a sixth part of that in consequence of his duly protecting (his kingdom).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/306_raxan_dharmeNa.md">
<details open><summary><h3>306 रक्षन् धर्मेण ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

रक्षन् धर्मेण भूतानि  
राजा वध्यांश् च घातयन् ।  
यजते ऽहर् अहर् यज्ञैः  
सहस्रशत-दक्षिणैः  ॥ ८.३०६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/306_raxan_dharmeNa.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king who, according to the law, protects all creatures and strikes them who deserve to be struck, offers, day by day, sacrifices at which hundreds of thousands are given away.—(306)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**भूतानि** स्थावरजङ्गमानि चौरेभ्यो **रक्षन्,** **वध्यांश् च** शास्त्रतो वधार्हास् तांश् च **घातयन्,** **सहस्रशतदक्षिणानां** पौण्डरीकादीनां क्रतूनां फलम् अन्वहं राजा प्राप्नोतीति स्तुतिः ॥ ८.३०६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Creatures*’—movable as well as immovable beings.

‘*Protects*’—these from thieves.

‘*Striking those who deserve to be struck*’—who are liable, under law,
to the penalty of death.

Such a king daily acquires the merit of performing such sacrifices ‘*at
which hundreds of thousands are given away*’—*e.g*., the *Pauṇḍarīka*
and the rest. This has been added by way of praise of the act—(306)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 254);—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra p. 397);—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 263).
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

न ह्य् अकस्मात् स्तुतिः प्रवर्तते, येनातः प्रजासंरक्षणाद् यथोक्तेन शास्त्रन्यायेन राज्ञो धर्मेण भवितव्यम् । **वध्य**निग्रहश् च प्रणाडिकया संरक्षणार्थः । तथा च तस्मात् संरक्षणं पृथग् एव दर्शयति "रक्षन् धर्मेण" । वर्णाश्रमिणो यथाशास्त्रं स्वकर्मण्य् अवस्थापयति, शास्त्रार्थप्रदर्शनेन । कथम् । "यूयम् एवं भवत, शास्त्रशिष्टं कुरुत" इत्य् अर्थः; "यूयं पुनर् मैवं भूत, प्रतिषिद्धं वर्जयत" इत्य् अर्थः । एतदनुशासनातिक्रमाद् यथाशास्त्रदण्डेन वा तान् रक्षति । तथा च सत्य् अन्यद् रक्षणं **वध्य**वधक्रियतो विज्ञायते । एतदनुशासनातिक्रमाद् यथाशास्त्रदण्डेन वा तान् रक्षति । तथा च सत्य् अन्यद् रक्षणं **वध्य**वधक्रियतो विज्ञायते । एवं च सति वक्ष्यति "रक्षणाद् आर्यवृत्तानां कण्टकानां च शोधनात्", तथा "निग्रहेण च पापानां साधूनां संग्रहेण च" इत्य् एवमादि ॥ ८.३०५ ॥

_यतश् चैतद् एवम्, अतः ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

306	A king who protects the created beings in accordance with the sacred law and smites those worthy of corporal punishment, daily offers (as it were) sacrifices at which hundred thousands (are given as) fees.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/307_yo.araxan.md">
<details open><summary><h3>307 यो ऽरक्षन् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यो ऽरक्षन् बलिम् आदत्ते  
करं शुल्कं च पार्थिवः ।  
प्रतिभागं च दण्डं च  
स सद्यो नरकं व्रजेत्  ॥ ८.३०७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/307_yo.araxan.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king, who, without affording protection, takes tributes, taxes, duties, presents and fines, would immediately sink into hell.—(307)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**बलि**प्रभृतीनि राजग्राह्यकरनामानि देशभेदे सूपमाणवकवत्[^३१२] प्रसिद्धानि । तत्र **बलिर्** धान्यादेः षष्ठो भागः । **करो** द्रव्यादानम् । **शुल्कं** वणिक्प्राप्यभागः । **प्रतिभागं** फलभरणिकाद्युपायनम्[^३१३] । राजैतद् गृह्णाति, चौरेभ्यश् च न रक्षति, **स सद्य** आयुःक्षयान् **नरकं** गच्छेत् । गृहीत्वा राजभागं रक्षा कर्तव्या, नरकायुःक्षयभयाद् इति श्लोकतात्पर्यम् ॥ ८.३०७ ॥


[^३१३]:
     DK: phalābhara-


[^३१२]:
     M G: sūpe māṇavakavat; DK (1: 1701; but 4: 1344 has the reading of the edition): deśabhedeṣu yāni mānavakavat
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Tributes*’ and the rest are the names of the various kinds of royal
dues; known by several names in several countries, just like the words
‘*sūpa*’, ‘*māṇavaka*’ and the rest. Of these ‘*tribute*’ is the sixth
part of the grain-produce;—‘*tax*’ is what is paid in cash;—‘*duties*’
are what the tradesmen pay;—‘*presents*’ are offering of fruits and the
like.

If a king takes all this, and yet does not protect the people from
thieves, he would ‘*immediately*’—having his life-span cut short—‘*sink
into hell*.’

The meaning of the verso is that—‘for fear of having his life span cut
short and sinking into hoH, the king should receive his dues and afford
protection to the people.’—(307)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Balim*’—‘The share in kind, *i.e*., the sixth part of the harvest’
(Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda);—‘choice
portions of grains and cattle &c.’ (Nandana).

‘*Kararm*’—Tax in cash’ (Medhātithi, whose expression ‘*dravyādāna*’ has
been misread by Buhler as ‘*jaṅghā* *dāna*’);—‘taxes, paid monthly, or
at fixed times by the villages’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).

‘*Śulkam*’—‘Tolls and duties payable by merchants’ (Medhātithi).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 397);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 255),
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.307-309)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (1.338).—‘If the King iniquitously adds to his treasury
out of the realm, he, before long loses his prosperity and becomes
ruined, along with his relations.’

Do. (1.335).—(See under 304-305.)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

तथा शिष्टस्मरणप्रवादः ॥ ८.३०६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

307	A king who does not afford protection, (yet) takes his share in kind, his taxes, tolls and duties, daily presents and fines, will (after death) soon sink into hell.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/308_araxitAraM_rAjAnam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>308 अरक्षितारं राजानम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अरक्षितारं राजानं  
बलिषड्भाग-हारिणम् [क्: अरक्षितारं अत्तारं] ।  
तम् आहुः सर्वलोकस्य  
समग्रमल-हारकम्  ॥ ८.३०८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/308_araxitAraM_rAjAnam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who affords no protection and devours the people, grabbing his tribute of the sixth part of the produce,—him they declare to be the imbiber of the filth of the whole people.—(308)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वस्य शेषो ऽयं निन्दार्थवादः । न रक्षति, **अत्ता** उपजीविता प्रजानां राजभागग्रहणेन । एतद् एव स्पष्टयति- **बलिषड्भागहारिणम्** । **तं** तादृशं राजानम् **आहुः** शिष्टाः **सर्वलोकस्य** सर्वस्याः प्रजायाः **समग्रं मलं** पापं तस्य **हारकं** स्वीकर्तारम् । सर्वेण प्रजापापेन दूष्यत इत्य् अर्थः ॥ ८.३०८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse is a deprecatory supplement to what has gone before.

‘*Affords no protection*,’ and ‘*devours*’—*i.e*., lives upon the
people, by taking the royal dues. this same idea is stated more
clearly—‘*grabbing his tribute.'*

Such a king, all cultured men declare to be the ‘*imbiber of*’—who draws
upon himself—‘*fifth*’— sin—‘*of the whole people*’—of all his subjects.
That is, such a king is befouled by the sins of his people.—(308)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 255).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.307-309)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.308].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

308	They declare that a king who affords no protection, (yet) receives the sixth part of the produce, takes upon himself all the foulness of his whole people.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/309_anapexita-maryAdan_nAstikam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>309 अनपेक्षित-मर्यादन् नास्तिकम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अनपेक्षित-मर्यादं  
नास्तिकं विप्रलुंपकम् [मेधातिथिपाठः - अनवेक्षित-मर्यादं] ।  
अरक्षितारम् अत्तारं  
नृपं विद्याद् अधो-गतिम्  ॥ ८.३०९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/309_anapexita-maryAdan_nAstikam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who heeds not the bounds of morality, who is a disbeliever, who is extortionate, who does not afford protection, and is grabbing,—such a king one should regard as doomed to perdition.—(309)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**मर्यादा** शास्त्रशिष्टसमाचारनिरूढा धर्मव्यवस्था,[^३१४] सा अनवेक्षिता अतिक्रान्ता येन । नास्ति परलोको नास्ति दत्तं नास्ति हुतम् इति[^३१५] **नास्तिकः** । प्रथमो रागादिना त्यक्तधर्मः, द्वितीयो[^३१६] नास्ति वस्त्व् इति विपरीताभिनिवेशः<sup> </sup>[^३१७] । **विलुम्पति**[^३१८] हरति धनान्य् असद्दण्डैः प्रजानाम् । तत्तुल्यो **ऽरक्षिता** । तम् **अधोगतिं विद्यान्** नरकपतितम् अधोगतं विद्यान् नरकपतितम् एवाचिरात् । पाठान्तरम्- "असत्यं च नृपं त्यजेत्" । अन्यद् उक्त्वान्यत् करोति यस् तं त्यजेत् तद्विषये नासीत ॥ ८.३०९ ॥


[^३१८]:
     DK (4: 1345) suggests: vipralumpati


[^३१७]:
     M G: vastuviparīto 'tiniścayaḥ


[^३१६]:
     M G J omit: dvitīyo (I follow DK 1: 577 and 4: 1345)


[^३१५]:
     DK (4: 1345) suggests adding: matir asyeti


[^३१४]:
     M G add: yā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Bounds of morality*’—*i.e*., moral laws based upon scripture and the
usage of cultured men; he by whom those are ‘*not heeded*’—*i.e*., who
transgresses them.

‘*Disbeliever*’—who holds that ‘there is no higher world,—there is
nothing in charity—nothing in sacrifices.’

The former—‘who heeds not the bounds of morality’—is one who acts
against the law, through hate and other passions (and who does not hold
wrong opinions), while the latter is one who *deities* the law, and
adheres to principles contrary to it.

‘*Extortionate*’— he who extorts money from the people, by illegal fines
and such other means.

Similar to him is ‘*he who does not afford protection*.’

‘*Such a king one should regard as doomed to perdition*,’—*i.e*., as
going to sink into hell before long.

Another reading for’ the last quarter is ‘*asatyañca nṛpam
tyajet*’;—which means that if a king says one thing and does another,
and is thus, ‘*untruthful*,’— him ‘*one should abandon*,’—*i.e*., one
should not live in the realms of such a king.—(309)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vipralumpakam*’—‘Deserter of the Brāhmaṇa’ (Nandana, whose reading is
‘*vipralopakam*’);—‘who takes property even from a Brāhmaṇa’
(Nārāyaṇa);—‘rapacious, *i.e*., who takes (grains &c) improperly’
(Medhātithi).

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 255), which
explains ‘*vipralopakam*’ (which is its reading for ‘*vipralumpakam*’)
as ‘one who injures the livelihood of the Brāhmaṇas’,—and ‘*attaram*’,
‘one who enjoys.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.307-309)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.308].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

स्तेनप्रकरणे च रक्षार्थं स्तेननिग्रहानुष्ठानं संस्तुत्य, तन्निग्रहस्वरूपम् अधुनेदम् आह ॥ ८.३०८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

309	Know that a king who heeds not the rules (of the law), who is an atheist, and rapacious, who does not protect (his subjects, but) devours them, will sink low (after death).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/310_adhArmikan_tribhir.md">
<details open><summary><h3>310 अधार्मिकन् त्रिभिर् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अधार्मिकं त्रिभिर् न्यायैर्  
निगृह्णीयात् प्रयत्नतः ।  
निरोधनेन बन्धेन  
विविधेन वधेन च  ॥ ८.३१० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/310_adhArmikan_tribhir.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall carefully suppress the unrighteous by three modes (of restraint)—by imprisonment, by enchaining and by various forms of ‘immolation.’—(310)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अर्थवादैर् दृढीकृत्य निग्रहविधिम् इदानीं प्रस्तौति । **अधार्मिकः**[^३१९] प्रकरणाच् चौरः । तं **त्रिभिर्** नियमनप्रकारैर् **निगृह्णीयान्** नियच्छेत् । **न्यायो** नियामकः । **निरोधनं** राजदुर्गे बन्धनागारे धरणम्[^३२०] । **बन्धस्**[^३२१] तत्रैव रज्जुनिगडादिभिर् अस्वातन्त्र्योत्पादनम् । **विविधो वधस्** ताडनाद् आरभ्य शरीरनाशनात् प्राणत्यागपर्यन्तः । निर्देशाद् एव त्रित्वे लब्धे **त्रिभिर्** इति वचनम् अन्येषाम् अपि नियमनप्रकाराणां परिग्रहणार्थम् । तेन तप्ततैलसेकादयो ऽपि परिगृहीता भवन्ति ॥ ८.३१० ॥


[^३२१]:
     M G DK: caraṇabandhas


[^३२०]:
     M G omit: dharaṇam; DK: bandhaḥ


[^३१९]:
     M G DK (1: 577): adhārmikaṃ



##### ०४
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Having duly emphasised, by means of valedictory declarations, the duty
of restraining thieves, the text proceeds to lay down the law regarding
punishments.

‘*The unrighteous*’—stands, in this context, for the *thief*; him the
king shall ‘*suppress*’—keep in cheek—‘*by three modes of restraint*,’—
the term ‘*nyāy*? (*nyāya*?)’ being used in the literal sense of
‘restraint.’

‘*Imprisonment*,’—confinement in the royal fort, or in the prison-house.

‘*Enchaining*’— keeping in the prison-house, but in chains. ‘*Various
forms of immolation*,’—*i.e*., beginning from *beating* and ending with
actual *death* caused by the killing of the body.

That the methods of restraint are *three* would have been clear from the
enumeration itself; hence the addition of the epithet ‘*three*’ is to be
taken as serving the purpose of indicating that there are other methods
of restraint also; such as the pouring of heated oil and so forth.—(310)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 630), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Adhārmikam*’ means, from the context, the
thief,—‘*nyāyaiḥ*’, restraints, checks,—‘*nirodhana*’, throwing into
prison,—‘*bandha*’, restricting freedom by means of chains and so forth,
—‘*vividhena vadhena*’, in the form of *beating* and the like.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.310-311)**

*Nārada* (Theft, 61).—‘Let the King practise the duties of his office,
and follow the rule of inflicting punishments, faithful to the tenets of
the sacred law. Let him accordingly, as governor, destroy the
evil-doers, after having traced them by the application of cunning
stratagems and arrested them.’

*Bṛhaspati* (27.4 *et seq*.).—‘When he has discovered an offender, the
King shall inflict one of the various kinds of punishments on him,
*viz*., gentle admonition, harsh reproof, corporal punishment, or one of
the four gradations of fines; he shall inflict gentle admonition when
the offence is very light; harsh reproof, for a crime of the first
degree; a fine for crime of the middle degree, and arrest in the case of
high treason. Banishment also may be resorted to by the King.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ताडनादिना यथापराधम् । यो यथापराध्यति, तं तथापराधानुरूपेण दण्डेन योजयेद् अरागद्वेषो धर्मतुलाम् आश्रित्य । कस्य पुनर् हेतोः । येन — ॥ ८.३०९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

310	Let him carefully restrain the wicked by three methods,- by imprisonment by putting them in fetters, and by various (kinds of) corporal punishments.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/311_nigraheNa_hi.md">
<details open><summary><h3>311 निग्रहेण हि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

निग्रहेण हि पापानां  
साधूनां संग्रहेण च ।  
द्विजातय इवेज्याभिः  
पूयन्ते सततं नृपाः  ॥ ८.३११ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/311_nigraheNa_hi.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For by suppressing the vicious and postering the virtuous, kings become purified, just as twice-born men by the daily sacrifices.—(311)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पापयुक्ताः पुरुषाः **पापाः** । तेषां **निग्रहः** पूर्वोक्तः[^१] । यथाशास्त्रवर्तिनः[^२] **साधवः** । तेषां **संग्रहो** ऽनुग्रहो यथाशक्त्युपकारः । तेन **पूयन्ते** विपाप्मानो भवन्ति प्रायश्चित्तेनेवेत्य्[^३] अर्थवादः । अथ वा पापानुत्पत्तिर् एव पूतत्वम् । ब्राह्मणा इव[^४] सततम् **इज्याभिः** नित्यैर् महायज्ञादिभिः ॥ ८.३११ ॥


[^४]:
     M G: eva


[^३]:
     M G J: prāyaścittena vety


[^२]:
     M G DK (1: 577): yathāśāstravadvartinaḥ


[^१]:
     M G: pūrvokta-
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Persons full of vice are called ‘*vicious*’; of these there should be
‘*suppressing*’ in the manner described above.

Those who behave in accordance with the scriptures are called the
‘*virtuous*’;—of these there should be ‘*fostering*,’ *i.e*., favourable
treatment to the best of one’s ability.

By this ‘*kings become purified*’— freed from sins—as if by the
performance of expiatory rites.

This is only a commendatory declaration.

Or, being ‘*purified*’ may be taken as consisting in *the non-incurring
of sin*.

Just as Brāhmaṇas are ‘*purified*’ by the ‘*daily sacrifices*’—the daily
performance of the five Great Sacrifices.—(311)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 618), which explains
‘*pāpāḥ*’ as *sinners*,—and ‘*Sādhavaḥ*’ as ‘persons acting in
accordance with the scriptures.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.310-311)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.310].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

निर्बीजस्तुत्यर्थासंभवेन च यथाश्रुत उपकारो राज्ञो धर्मलक्षणस् तन्निग्रहात् प्रतीयते, निग्राह्यस्य च स्तेनस्य । तथा च "राजभिर् धृतदण्डा" इति वक्ष्यति । जानपदसंरक्षणाच् च धर्मसंबन्धः सिद्धः । यतः एवम् आत्मापरानुग्रहभूयस्त्वा[त् रक्षा] या न प्रमाद्यः पाप[निग्रहसाधु]संरक्षणार्थो राजेति । अथ त्व् एवासाम्येन प्रजासु वर्तमानं मोहात् कश्चित् क्षिपेत् । ततस् तेन ॥ ८.३१० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

311	For by punishing the wicked and by favouring the virtuous, kings are constantly sanctified, just as twice-born men by sacrifices.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/312_xantavyam_prabhuNA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>312 क्षन्तव्यम् प्रभुणा ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

क्षन्तव्यं प्रभुणा नित्यं  
क्षिपतां कार्यिणां नृणाम् ।  
बाल-वृद्धातुराणां च  
कुर्वता हितम् आत्मनः  ॥ ८.३१२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/312_xantavyam_prabhuNA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king should always forgive the partisans of litigants who abuse him, as also the young, the aged and the infirm,—thereby accomplishing his own welfare.—(312)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**कार्यिणो** ऽर्थिप्रत्यर्थिज्ञातिसुहृदः । कस्मिंश्चिद् वध्यमाने[^५] यदि तत्पिता तन्माता वा राजानं क्षिपेत् कुत्सयेत् अभ्शपेद् वा तदा क्षमा कार्या । **बाला**दीनां **कार्यिणाम्** अपि[^६] । एवम् **आत्मने हितं** कृतं भवति । क्षन्तव्यम् इत्य् एतद्विधेः फलम्[^७] एवात्महितम् ॥ ८.३१२ ॥


[^७]:
     M G: etad vividhaphalam


[^६]:
     M G DK omit: api


[^५]:
     M G DK (1: 78): dhanyamāne
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Partisans of litigants*,’—*i.e*., the relations and friends of the
plaintiff and the defendant. When one of the parties is imprisoned, his
father or mother may ‘*abuse*’— cast aspersions upon, or curse—the king;
then he should forgive them.

Also the litigants themselves, when they happen to be ‘*young or aged or
infirm*.’

In this manner his own welfare becomes accomplished. This
‘accomplishment of welfare’ is the fruit of obeying the injunction
‘shall forgive.’—(312)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Vyavahāra, p. 66);—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (14a), which explains ‘*kṣipatām*’ as ‘shouting.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.312-313)  
**

*Nārada* (Theft, 39-40).—‘Neither for the purpose of gaining a friend,
nor for the acquisition of wealth, should a wicked criminal be suffered
by the King to go free. By pardoning an offender, a king commits the
same offence as by punishing an innocent man. Religious merit accrues to
him from punishing the wicked.’

*Bṛhaspati* (22-33).—‘By punishment of the wicked and release of the
virtuous, the renown and religious merit of the King is increased.’

*Gautama* (12-52).—‘Or pardon may be granted in accordance with an
assemblage of persons learned in the Vedas.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अर्थवाद]म् आह, उपदिष्टार्थानुष्ठानप्ररोचनार्थम् ॥ ८.३११ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

312	A king who desires his own welfare must always forgive litigants, infants, aged and sick men, who inveigh against him.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/313_yaH_xipto.md">
<details open><summary><h3>313 यः क्षिप्तो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यः क्षिप्तो मर्षयत्य् आर्तैस्  
तेन स्वर्गे महीयते ।  
यस् त्व् ऐश्वर्यान् न क्षमते  
नरकं तेन गच्छति  ॥ ८.३१३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/313_yaH_xipto.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who, on being abused by men in distress, forgives, becomes exalted to heaven, by that act; while he who, through kingly pride, does not forgive, goes, by that act, to hell.—(313)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**आर्तैर्** दण्ड्यमनतत्संबन्धिभिर् अधि**क्षिप्त** आक्रुष्टो यन् **मर्षयति** न क्रुध्यति **तेन** क्षमणेन **स्वर्गे महीयते** । कण्ड्वादित्वाद् यः[^८] । महत्त्वं प्राप्नोति स्वर्गे । अकोपेन तर्हि क्षमा कर्तव्या । अकामिनो यथाकामी अत आह । यत् तु[^९] प्रभुर् अहम् इत्य् अभिमानेन न सहते **तेन** **नरकं** प्राप्नोति । **आर्त**ग्रहणं बालवृद्धयोर् अपि प्रदर्शनार्थं पूर्वशेषत्वाद् अस्य ॥ ८.३१३ ॥


[^९]:
     DK: svarge akopena | na tarhi kṣamā kartavyā akāminā ayathākāminā | ata āha yas tv iti |


[^८]:
     M G: kaṇvādir ayam; DK (1: 79): kaṇḍvādir ayam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Men in distress*,’—*i.e*., the man who is punished, or his relations.

‘*Abused*’—reproached.

‘*Forgives*’—does not become angry.

‘*By that act*’—by the act of forgiving.

‘*Becomes exalted to heaven*’—the root ‘*maha*’ (in ‘*mahīyate*) belongs
to the ‘*Kaṇḍvādi*’ group, hence the ‘*ya*’ in the middle of the word.
The meaning is that ‘in heaven he gains an exalted position.’

For this reason, without showing any anger, he shall forgive.

If, however, under the influence of pride, thinking himself to be
all-powerful, he does not condone the abuse, then, by that act he goes
to hell.

The term ‘*men in distress*’ includes *the young and the infirm* also;
since the present verse is supplementary to the foregoing (where these
latter have been mentioned).—(313)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (14a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.312-313)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.313].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवम् इयं क्ष्[अमानुष्ठानस्तुतिः । चि]त्तसंक्षोभहेऊपनिपाते ऽपि राज्ञा क्षमोभयलोकोपार्जनसाधनं प्रयत्नतो भावनीया । वाक्यस्वाभाव्याच् चेयम् उभयथात्र श्लोके क्षमानुष्ठानस्तुति[ः] । राजसंबन्धाच् च स्तेनप्रायश्चित्तस्येदम् एतत्प्रकरण एवोच्यते ॥ ८.३१२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

313	He who, being abused by men in pain, pardons (them), will in reward of that (act) be exalted in heaven; but he who, (proud) of his kingly state, forgives them not, will for that (reason) sink into hell.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/314_rAjA_stenena.md">
<details open><summary><h3>314 राजा स्तेनेन ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

राजा स्तेनेन गन्तव्यो  
मुक्त-केशेन धावता [मेधातिथिपाठः - धीमता] ।  
आचक्षाणेन तत् स्तेयम्  
एवंकर्मास्मि शाधि माम्  ॥ ८.३१४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/314_rAjA_stenena.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The wise thief shall approach the king, with flying hair, confessing the theft, with the words—‘I have done this, punish me’;—(314)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अविशेषोपादाने सुवर्णहारी **स्तेनो** द्रष्टव्यः, तस्यैव शास्त्रान्तरे गमनविधानात् । न चेदम् आगमनपरं[^११] विधिशास्त्रम्,[^१२] दण्डविधित्वात् । उक्तं हि "स्तेनस्यातः प्रवक्ष्यामि विधिं दण्डविनिर्णये" (म्ध् ८.३०१) इति । अतो ऽनुवादओ गमनस्यात्र[^१३] । राजसकाशं सुवर्णचौरेण गन्तव्यम्[^१४] । **मुक्तकेशेन धीमता** दैर्यवता । "धावता" इति पाठान्तरम् । **आचक्षाणेन** कथयता पथि तत्पातकम् "**एवंकर्मास्मि** ब्राह्मणस्य मयेयत् सुवर्णं हृतम् इति कुरु निग्रहं मे" ॥ ८.३१४ ॥


[^१४]:
     DK: gantavyam iti


[^१३]:
     M G: ato 'nuvādam agamanasyātra; DK: ato 'nuvādamātraṃ (and connects with what follows)


[^१२]:
     M G: vidhiśāstra-


[^११]:
     M G: vedanam āgamanaparaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In as much as nothing is specified, the ‘*thief*’ here is to be
understood as one who has stolen *gold*; specially as it is only in the
case of such a thief that other Smṛti-texts have laid down the
‘approaching of the king.’ The present text itself cannot be taken as an
injunction laying down the act of ‘approaching’; because the
subject-matter of the present context consists of the injunction of
punishments for theft, as clearly declared above in Verse 301—‘I am now
going to expound the law relating to punishments for theft.’ Hence the
present can only be taken as a *re-iteration* of the act of
‘approaching’ (enjoined elsewhere); hence it must mean that ‘one who has
stolen gold should approach the king’—‘*with flying hair*.’

‘*Wise*’—courageous.

Another reading for ‘*dhīmatā*,’ ‘*wise*,’ is ‘*dhāvatā*,’ ‘*running*.’
‘*confessing*’—proclaiming his crime on the road—‘*i have done
this*’—act of stealing brāhmaṇa’s gold—inflict upon me the proper
punishment.’—(314)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 8.314-315)  
**

*Cf* 11.199-201.

These verses are quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 1078):—and in *Mitākṣarā*
(2.267, where only 315 is quoted).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.314-315)**

[\[ *See* Manu
11.100-101.\]]

*Gautama* (12.48).—‘A man who has stolen gold shall approach the King,
with flying hair, holding a club in his hand, and proclaim his deed.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.1.16-17).—‘A thief shall go to the King with flying
hair, carrying on his shoulder a club of *sindhuka* wood, and say
‘strike me with this.’ Then the King shall strike him. They quote the
following verse:—“A thief shall go to the King carrying a club on his
shoulder and say to him, *Punish me with this, O King*.”’

*Āpastamba* (1.25.4).—‘A thief shall go to the King with flying hair,
carrying a club on his shoulder and tell him what he has done. The King
shall give him a blow with that club. If the thief dies, his sin is
expiated.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.41).—‘If a man has stolon gold belonging to a Brāhmaṇa he
shall run with flying hair to the King, exclaiming “Ho! I am a thief,
Sir, punish me.” The King shall give him a weapon made of *udumbara*
wood, with that he shall kill himself. It is declared in the Veda that
he becomes purified by this death.’

*Viṣṇu* (52.1).—‘He who has stolen gold must bring a club to the King,
proclaiming his deed.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.257).—‘The man who has stolen gold belonging to a
Brāhmaṇa shall present to the King a club, proclaiming his deed; he
becomes purified if the King kills him with it, or pardons him.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 27).—‘For stealing more than a hundred *palas* of gold,
silver, or other precious metals, or line clothes, or very precious
gems, corporal punishment or death shall be inflicted.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 46).—‘The thief must approach the King with flying hair
running and proclaiming his deed, saying “thus have I acted, chastise
me.” By so doing, he is cleared from guilt, because he has confessed his
deed. The King therefore shall touch him with the club or dismiss him.’

*Bṛhaspati* (22.27-28).—‘For the stealing of women, men, gold, gems, the
property of a deity or Brāhmaṇa, silk and other valuable things, the
fine shall he equal to the value of the article stolen; or double the
amount shall be inflicted by the King as fine; or the thief shall be
executed, to prevent a repetition of the offence.’

*Saṃvarta* (Aparārka, p. 1079).—‘Then the King himself shall strike the
thief with a club; if the thief is alive after this, he becomes freed
from the sin of stealing.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पातकं यस्य सुवर्णादेर् अभिसंबन्धेनायं स्तेन उच्यते, न द्रव्यमात्रस्य, प्रायश्चित्तमहत्त्वोपदेशात् । तथा च प्रायश्चित्तप्रकरणे विशेषयिष्यति "सुवर्णस्तेयकृत्" इत्य् एवमादि । अन्ये तु द्रव्यमात्रापहारकं स्तेनं मन्यन्ते । अत्र तत्प्रत्यवमर्शात्मकस्य श्रद्दधानतया राजाभिगमनं स्वयं **धीमता** "विविधेन वधेन च" शुद्धिहेतुर् इदं प्रायश्चित्तशास्त्रसामर्थ्याद् इत्य् एवं जानतानेन । अन्ये तु "धावता" इति पठन्त्य् आदरार्थम् । न चेयान् एव स्तेनस्य राजोपगमनं धर्मः, किं तर्हि, अयं चान्यह् ॥ ८.३१३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

314	A thief shall, running, approach the king, with flying hair, confessing that theft (and saying), 'Thus have I done, punish me;'
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/315_skandhenAdAya_musalam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>315 स्कन्धेनादाय मुसलम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

स्कन्धेनादाय मुसलं  
लगुडं वापि खादिरम् [मेधातिथिपाठः - मुशलं] ।  
शक्तिं चोभयतस् तीक्ष्णाम्  
आयसं दण्डम् एव वा  ॥ ८.३१५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/315_skandhenAdAya_musalam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

—Carrying on his shoulder a pestle, or a Club of khadira wood, or a spear sharp at both ends, or an iron staff.—(315)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वर्णानाम् अनुक्रमेण मुसलादीनाम् उपदेशं <u>मन्यन्ते</u> । 

<u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । **वा**शब्दो न समर्थितः स्यात् । न च ब्राह्मणस्येदं प्रायश्चित्तम् इच्छन्ति । तत्प्रायश्चित्तेषु निरूपयिष्यामः । **खदिर**जातिर् लगुड एव, न मुशलेनानुषक्तव्यः ॥ ८.३१५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Some people hold that the weapons to be carried have been mentioned in
the particular order in view of the caste of the thief.

But this is not right; as in that case there would be no justification
for the term ‘or’; and further, people do not recognise this as the
expiation meant for the Brāhmaṇa thief, as we shall explain in the
section on ‘Expiation.’

It is only the *club*, and not the *pestle*, that is to be taken as
qualified by the epithet ‘*of khadira wood*’—(315)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 8.314-315)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.314].
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.314-315)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.314].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एकार्थविषयो विकल्पो मुसलादीनां ब्राह्मणवर्जम् । अन्ये तु वर्णक्रमेणैषां मुसलादीनाम् उपदेशं मन्यन्ते । एवं च स स्वयम् उपगतः श्रद्दधानतया क्षत्रियादिर् यथाशास्त्रम् ॥ ८.३१४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

315	(And he must) carry on his shoulder a pestle, or a club of Khadira wood, or a spear sharp at both ends, or an iron staff.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/316_shAsanAd_vA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>316 शासनाद् वा ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

शासनाद् वा विमोक्षाद् वा  
स्तेनः स्तेयाद् विमुच्यते ।  
अशासित्वा तु तं राजा  
स्तेनस्याप्नोति किल्बिषम्  ॥ ८.३१६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/316_shAsanAd_vA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The thief becomes absolved from the theft, either through punishment or through acquittal. By not punishing the thief, the king imbibes the guilt of the thief.—(310)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**शासनान्** मुशलादिभिः प्रहरणात् क्षत्रियादिः पापान् मुच्यते । **विमोक्षाद्** उत्सर्गात् । गच्छ क्षान्तम् इति "ब्राह्मणस् तपसैव" (म्ध् ११.९९) इति वधतपसी विहिते । तत्र वधस् तावद् ब्राह्मणस्य नास्ति । तपस् तु प्रायश्चित्तं । न च तपसि[^१५] इच्छातो राजाभिगमनम् अस्ति । तस्मात् क्षत्रियादीनाम् एष विमोक्षः । स च धनदण्डं गृहीत्वा । यत आह **अशासित्वे**त्यादि । न च विमोक्षणसुद्धौ सत्यां राज्ञस् तदशासनाद् दोषोपपत्तिः । न च "शासनम् अपि विहितं मोक्षो ऽपि विहित, तत्र यस्मिन् पक्षे शासनं तदपेक्षं दोषवचनम्" । पाक्षिकं हि तथा कल्पनम्[^१६] । न च नित्यवच् छ्रुतस्य पाक्षिकत्वं युक्तं कल्पयितुम् । तथा च सामान्येन वसिष्ठादय आहुः । 


[^१६]:
     M G DK (1: 1703): kalpet


[^१५]:
     M G J: tapa

- एनो ऋच्छति[^१७] राजानम्[^१८] उत्सृजन्तं सकिल्बिषन् ।


[^१८]:
     DK: rājānam ṛcchati


[^१७]:
     M G J: adharmena svīyena ṛcchati

- तं चेद् घातयेद्[^१९] राजा घ्नन् धर्मेण न दुष्यति ॥ (वध् १९.४६) 


[^१९]:
     M G: cejyādyato

नायं विकल्पो युक्तः । क्वचिद् इयं हिंसा प्रतिषिद्धा- "न हिंस्याद् भूतानि" इति रागादिना पुरुषार्थतया प्राप्ता । क्वचिद् विहिता- क्रत्वर्थत्वेन "यो दीक्षितो यद् अग्नीषोमीयम्" (त्स् ६.१.११.६) इति । इदं[^२०] तु शासनविमोक्षणवचनं[^२१] न हि नाम प्रतिषिद्धं[^२२] सति विधौ । 


[^२२]:
     M G: pratiṣiddhādyuktau; DK: pratiṣiddhā ukte


[^२१]:
     M G: -vañcanā; DK: -vañcanāt


[^२०]:
     M G DK: iyaṃ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कथं न प्रतिषेधो "न हिंस्याद् भूतानि" इति सामान्यतः प्रतिषेधो विधिविशेषम् अन्तरेण न शक्यो बाधितुम् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अथोच्यते । नैवायं प्रतिषेधस्य विषयः, कर्मार्थत्वात् । कथं पुनर् अन्तरेण विधिं कर्मार्थता शक्यावगन्तुम् । लोकत इति चेत्, लौकिकी तर्हि प्रवृत्तिः । कथं तर्हि प्रतिषेधस् तत्रावतरेत् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च प्रदाने प्रवृत्तिर् निरूप्यताम् । यदि तावद् वैदिकी प्रवृत्तिस् ततस् तदङ्गे हिंसायाम् अपि तत एव । एका हि प्रवृत्तिर् अङ्गप्रधानयोः[^२३] । अथ लिप्सातो ऽङ्गे ऽपि तत्र[^२४] प्रवृत्तिः, सुतरां तर्हि हिंसेयं लौकिकी । जीविकार्थिनो हि प्रजापालनाधिकारनियमो न[^२५] वेधः । तेनेयम् अङ्गस्थापि हिंसा श्येनेन[^२६] तुल्यत्वात् प्रतिषेधविषयः । न च लौकिकम् अस्या नियतम् अङ्गत्वम् । नो[^२७] हिंसाम् अन्तरेण प्रजापालनम् अशक्यम्, निरोधादिनापि शक्यत्वात् । नैष नियमः । एकरूपाङ्गप्रधानयोः प्रवृत्तिर् इति स्यान् नाग्नीषोमीययोर् अनेन न[^२८] विशेषः स्यात् । अतो लिप्सालक्षणे ऽपि प्रधाने ऽङ्गे विधिलक्षणम्[^२९] अभ्युपेतव्यम् । न चैषां[^३०] हिंसा विधिलक्षणा[^३१] शक्याभ्युपगन्तुं स्वरूपस्य कार्यस्य च लौकिकत्वात् पालनस्य हिंसायाश् च । अथ विधिलक्षणा षोडशिग्रहणवद्[^३२] विकल्पितुम् अर्हति शासनवचनेन प्रतिषिद्धा । 


[^३२]:
     M G: ṣoḍaśa-


[^३१]:
     M G: vidhiḥ lakṣaṇā


[^३०]:
     M G J: caiṣa


[^२९]:
     M G: pradhānāṅgavidhilakṣaṇam


[^२८]:
     M G J omit: na


[^२७]:
     DK: na


[^२६]:
     M G: mukhyena; J: śyena-


[^२५]:
     M G DK: 'tra


[^२४]:
     DK: tata eva


[^२३]:
     M G: antaraṅga-

<u>अन्ये</u> तु मन्यन्ते । द्वे एते वाक्ये । शासनाद् इति स्तेनस्य बुद्धिर् उच्यते । परेणार्धेन राज्ञस् तदशासने दोषः । तत्र यदि राजाशासनदोषम् आत्मन्य् अङ्गीकृत्य मुञ्चेन् मुच्येतैवैनसः । एवं ब्राह्मणस्यापि स्वयम् आगतस्य वधः शुद्धिहेतुः-[^३३] "लक्ष्यं शास्त्रभृताम्[^३४]" (म्ध् ११.७२) इति वचनात् । "न शारीरो ब्राह्मणदण्डः" (ग्ध्१२.४३) इति[^३५] राजा यदि प्रतिषेधातिक्रमेण हन्याद् ब्राह्मणः शुध्येद् एव ।   
**अशासित्वा** मुशलादिभिर् अहत्वा । **स्तेनस्य** यत् पापं तेन युज्यते ॥ ८.३१६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Through punishment*’— with the stroke of the pestle and other things,
the thief of the *Kṣatriya* and lower castes ‘*becomes absolved*’ from
the guilt;—or ‘*through acquittal*’—*i.e*., by being let off, being
addressed with the words—‘Go, you have been forgiven.’

In regard to the *Brāhmaṇa thief*, under 11.100 below, ‘immolation’ and
‘austerities’ have been prescribed. But as a matter of fact, there can
be no ‘immolation’ of the *Brāhmaṇa*; and ‘austerity’ being an expiatory
rite, the ‘approaching’ of the king could not be with a view to any such
austerity. Hence the ‘*acquittal*’ here spoken of must also refer to the
*Kṣatriya* and other castes.

But there can be this ‘acquittal’ only after the fine has been realised;
because of what is said in the second half of the verse. And when the
man has become absolved through this acquittal, his non-punishment
cannot render the king open to censure.

It might be argued that—“Punishment and acquittal both being sanctioned
by law, the blame spoken of lies on the king in that, ease with
reference to which punishment has been enjoined.”

But this would make the injunction optional; and it is not right to
assume as optional what has been declared to be absolute. In fact
Vaśiṣṭha and others have laid down the law in general terms:—‘The thief
contaminates with his guilt the king who acquits him; but if the king
kills the guilty thief, since he kills him legally, no blame attaches to
him’;—and it cannot be right to regard this as optional.

It is true that the injuring of a living being is in one place
forbidden: the assertion ‘one should not injure any living being,’
forbidding such injury as might he inflicted under the influence of some
passion. In another place it is sanctioned, as for instance, in
connection with the *Agniṣṭoma* sacrifice.

But in the case in question the act of ‘punishing’ cannot, in the face
of the direct injunction of it, be held to be forbidden by the
declaration regarding ‘acquittal.’

How can it be regarded as *not forbidden*? The general prohibition
‘injure not a living being’ cannot be set aside, except when there is a
direct injunction of such injury (in any particular case).

It might be argued that—“The case in question does not fall within the
scope of the prohibition; since it is conducive to the fulfilment of a
particular act that has to be done.”

But, in the absence of a distinct injunction, how can it be believed
that a certain injuring is conducive to the fulfilment of an act?

It may be held that this would he learnt from worldly experience.

But in that case, the act being an ordinary worldly one,—how could any
prohibition affect it?

Let us consider the nature of the main act in question. If it is Vedic,
then the injuring of animals which forms part of that act must also
derive its sanction from the Veda. Because the principal and its
subsidiary both must derive their sanction from the same source. If,
even in the case of a *Vedic* act, a mere desire for gain forms the
motive, then, in that case, the injuring of the animal becomes a
*worldly* act. So that, in the case of the injuring of human beings by
the king inflicting punishments, the act forms part of that action of
‘protecting the people’ which is undertaken, by way of livelihood; and
as such it cannot form the subject of any Vedic Injunction. In fact,
even if the injuring formed part of a prescribed act, it could not form
the object of prohibition; as it would stand on the same, footing as the
*Śyena* sacrifice. The act of injuring again does not form a necessary
factor even in the worldly act (of protecting); for it is not impossible
to carry on the work of protection without inflicting injury;—the same
purpose being served by *reprimanding* and other similar means also.

It is not necessary that the motive behind the principal act and its
subsidiaries should he of the same kind. If it were, then there would be
no difference in the nature of the immolations of the two animals
offered to Agni-Soma (?). So that even when the principal act is
prompted by a desire for gain, it may be possible to regard its
subsidiary as prompted by an Injunction.

The act of ‘injuring’ under consideration however cannot be regarded as
prompted by an Injunction; as by its very nature, the act of
‘protecting,’ as also that of ‘injuring,’ is ‘worldly.’ If they were
prompted by an Injunction, then there would be an option between its
prohibition (by the general prohibition of all injury) and its
injunction as part of the act of ‘protecting,’—just as there is in the
case of the *holding* and *not-holding* of the *Śoḍaśī* vessels.

Others hold that the verse consists of two distinct sentences;—the first
half of the verse describing the way in which the thief becomes absolved
from guilt, and the latter indicating the impropriety involved in the
king’s failure to punish the thief, So that in a case where the king
lets off the thief, thus voluntarily incurring the sin of not punishing
him,—the thief does become absolved from his guilt.

Similarly when a Brāhmaṇa-thief surrenders himself, if he is killed, he
does become absolved from guilt; since we have the text—‘Becoming the
target of armed men, etc.’ (11.73). And even though in striking the
Brāhmaṇa the king may be going against the prohibition—‘For the Brāhmaṇa
there shall be no corporeal punishment’ (Gautama, 12.46),—yet there can
be no doubt that the Brāhmaṇa, thus punished, becomes absolved from his
guilt.

‘*By not punishing*’—not striking him with the pestle or other things—he
becomes contaminated with the guilt of the thief.—(316)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Saṃvarta* (Aparārka, p. 1079).—(See above.)

*Bodhāyana* (2.1-17).—‘Whether he be punished or be pardoned, the thief
becomes freed from his guilt. But if the King does not punish him, the
guilt of the thief falls upon him.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.41).—‘It is declared in the Veda that the thief becomes
purified by death caused with the club offered to him by the King.’

*Gautama* (12.44-45).—‘Whether he be slain or pardoned, he becomes
purified of his guilt. If the King does not strike him, the guilt falls
on the King.’

*Āpastamba* (1.25.4-5).—‘... If the thief dies, his sin is expiated. If
he is forgiven by the King, the guilt falls upon him who forgives him.’

*Viṣṇu* (52.2).—‘Whether the King kills the thief with the club, or
dismisses him unhurt, he becomes purified.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.257).—(See under 314-315.)

*Nārada* (Theft).—‘By going to the King and confessing his guilt, the
thief becomes purified. The King shall touch him with a club, or dismiss
him; in either case he becomes purified. Those men who have received a
punishment from the King for an offence committed by them, proceed to
heaven, free from sin, as if they were virtuous men who have acted well.
Whether he be punished or released, the thief is freed from his crime;
if, however, the King does not punish him. the guilt of the thief falls
on the King himself.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **शासनाद् [वा विमोक्षाद् वा स्तेनः स्तेयाद् विमुच्यते ।**

**शासनाद्** वा] वधलक्षणाद् अपराधमहत्त्वापेक्षया निर्धनतया **विमोक्षाद्** वा धनदण्डितः सन् । अपराधमहत्त्वे ऽपि ब्राह्मणः स्तेनः स्तेयाद् विमुच्यते । एतस्माद् एव कारणाद् अयं दण्डविकल्पः । तथा च गौतमः अस्मिन्न् एव प्रकरणे "न शारीरो ब्राह्मणदण्डः" इत्य् आह । यस् तु स्वयम् अनुपगतो ब्राह्मणस्तेनो राजपुरुषैर् आनीयते विदितापराधैर् बलात् तस्यापि च न वधः । किं तर्हि "कर्मवियोगविख्यापनविवासनाङ्ककरणानि" । तथापि च सर्वस्य हिरण्यादिस्तेनस्य दण्डविधिर् अयम् उपदिष्टः; यतः स्वयम् उपगतयोर् ब्राह्मणाब्राह्मणयोर् एवं दण्ड्यतैव स्यात् । तथा च सति ।

> **अशासित्वा तु तं राजा स्तेनस्याप्नोति किल्बिषम्  ॥ ८.३१५ ॥**

एवं च सत्य् एतद् अनयोः प्रायश्चित्तं शुद्धिहेतुत्वाद् विज्ञेयम् । तथा च राजाभिगमनं स्वयम् अनयोर् अर्थवद् भवतीति । वक्ष्यति हि ऽराजभिः कृतदण्डास् तु" इति । यस् तु राज्ञा बलाद् दण्ड्यते वध्यते वा न तस्य तेन दण्डेन निष्कृतिर् अस्ति । यतः तेन दण्डेन दण्डितेनापि सता प्रायश्चित्तं कर्तव्यम् एव । यश् च स्वयम् एव प्रायश्चित्तम् आरभते न तत्र राज्ञो हस्तप्रक्षेपो ऽस्ति । तथा च वक्ष्यति "प्रायश्चित्तं तु कुर्वानाः" इति । तुष्ट्युत्पत्तिश् च धनस्वामिनो ऽनेन दण्डितेनापि कार्यैव । अकुर्वंश् चैव राजा स्तेननिग्रहम् आत्मापघातं कुर्यात् ॥ ८.३१५ ॥

_यस्माद् आह ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

316	Whether he be punished or pardoned, the thief is freed from the (guilt of) theft; but the king, if he punishes not, takes upon himself the guilt of the thief.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/317_annAde_bhrUNahA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>317 अन्नादे भ्रूणहा ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अन्नादे भ्रूणहा मार्ष्टि  
पत्यौ भार्यापचारिणी ।  
गुरौ शिष्यश् च याज्यश् च  
स्तेनो राजनि किल्बिषम्  ॥ ८.३१७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/317_annAde_bhrUNahA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Embryo-killer expurgates his guilt on him who eats his food, the misbehaving wife on her husband, the disciple and the sacrificer on the preceptor, and the thief on the king.—(317)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अन्नम् अत्तीत्य् **अन्नाद्ः **। **भ्रूणहा** ब्रह्महा ।तदीयम् अन्नं यो भुङ्क्ते तस्मिंस् तद् ब्रह्महत्यापापं **मार्ष्टि** निरस्यति[^३६] श्लेषयति । यथा मलिनं वस्त्रम् उदके मृज्यते तन्मलं तत्र संक्रामत्य् एवम् । अर्थवादश् चायम् । तस्य तत्पापम् उत्पद्यते । न पुनर्[^३७] ब्रह्मघ्नो नश्यति[^३८] । **पत्यौ** भर्तरि **भार्यापचारिणी** जारिणी, स चेत् क्षमते । अत्रापि भर्तुर् उत्पाद्यते पापम्, न तत्र[^३९] तस्या अपैति । **गुरौ शिष्यश् च याज्यश् च** शिष्यः सूर्याभ्युदितादिभिर् अपराध्य तु[^४०] गुरौ क्षममाणे तत्पापं प्रक्षिपति । एवं याज्यो याजके[^४१] । सो ऽपि गुरुर् एवेत्य् अतो याजकग्रहणं न कृतम् । एवं चौरो **राजनि**, न चेद् राज्ञा निगृह्यते । याज्यो ऽपि कर्मणि प्रवृत्ते विधिम् उपक्रामति चेद् याजकवचने नावतिष्ठते तदा त्याज्यः, न पुनस् तस्य ताडनादि शिष्यवत् कर्तव्यम् । अन्नादादिषु सर्वेष्व् अन्यत्र विधिर् अस्तीति न बुद्धिः[^४२] । अतो ऽर्थवादो ऽयम् ॥ ८.३१७ ॥


[^४२]:
     M G: nāśuddhir; DK (1: 1704): nāsiddhir


[^४१]:
     M G: yājye yājakaḥ


[^४०]:
     J omits: tu


[^३९]:
     J omits: na tatra


[^३८]:
     M G: bradhno viśiṣyati; J: brahmaṇo śleṣaḥ


[^३७]:
     J omits: na punar


[^३६]:
     M G: nirasya rasyati; DK: nirasya nyasyati
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Annāda*’—one who eats food.

‘*Bhrūṇahā*’—he who has killed a Brāhmaṇa.

This latter ‘*expurgates*’ throws upon ‘*the man who eats his
food*’—‘*the guilt*,’ of killing the *Brāhmaṇa*; just as when the dirty
cloth is washed in water, its dirt becomes thrown into the water.

This is a purely valedictory declaration. The meaning is that the guilt
becomes separated from the Brāhmaṇa-killer, and attaches itself to the
other man.

On the ‘*pati*’—the husband —‘*the mishaving*’—adulterous—‘*wife*’—if he
condones the act. Here also the guilt disappears from the wife and
attaches itself to the husband.

‘*On the preceptor*, *the disciple and the sacrificer*’;—if the disciple
transgresses the laws relating to sun-rise, etc., and the preceptor
condones it, the guilt becomes thrown upon the latter. Similarly the
‘sacrificer’ on the officiating priest; since the latter is a
‘preceptor’; that is why the ‘officiating priest’ has not been mentioned
separately.

Similarly ‘*the thief on the King*,’—if he is not punished by the King.

If the sacrificer, in course of the sacrificial performances,
transgresses the rules, and does not adhere to the advice of the
officiating priest,—then he should be abandoned by the latter; and he is
not to be chastised and beaten, in the manner of a disciple.

In regard to the ‘*man who eats his food*’ and the rest, the present
text should not he taken as laying down an injunction; the whole of it
is purely declamatory.—(317)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Mss. N and S place 317 and its *Bhāṣya* after 318 but both add a note to
the effect—‘*ayam shloko rājabhirityasmāt pūrvam lekhanīyaḥ*’, ‘this
verse should be written after the verse *rājabhiḥ &c*.’ This is
apparently a corrector’s note on the mistake committed by a copyist.

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 509), which adds the
following note:—‘*Kilviṣam*’ is to be construed with each of the
four—‘*annāda*’, ‘*pati*’, ‘*guru*’ and ‘*rājā*’—and ‘*mārṣṭi*’ means
‘passes on.’

It is quoted in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 146), which explains ‘*mārṣṭi*’
as ‘transfer’;—and in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 781).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha* (19.44).—‘They quote the following verse:—“The slayer of a
learned Brāhmaṇa casts his guilt on him who eats his food; a misbehaving
wife on her husband; a student and a sacrificer on the teacher and the
officiating priest; and a thief on the King.” The guilt falls on the
King who pardons an offender, if he causes him to he slain, he destroys
sin in accordance with the sacred law.’

*Āpastamba* (1.19.15).—‘They quote the following:—“The murderer of a
Brāhmaṇa learned in the Veda heaps his guilt on his guest; an innocent
man on his calumniator; a thief set at liberty, on the King; and the
petitioner, on him who makes false promises.”
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अन्नम् अत्तीत्य् **अन्नादः** । तस्मिन् **अन्नादे भ्रूणहा किल्बिषं मार्ष्टि** । एवम् इतरे ऽपि योज्याः । अतः स्थितप्रज्ञेन राज्ञा निश्शङ्केन तदनिग्रहदोषम् आत्मनः परिहरता स्तेननिग्रहे यथाशास्त्रं वर्तितव्यम् आत्मपरानुग्रहार्थम् इति । यतः स्वयम् उपगतत्वाच् च कदाचिद् अयं भिन्नदृष्टिर् उपहतप्रतिज्ञानस् तन्निग्रहे न प्रवर्तेत ॥ ८.३१६ ॥

_यत्र अयं यत्न आस्थीयते तद् उपकारसंबन्धापेक्षयैवम् ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

317	The killer of a learned Brahmana throws his guilt on him who eats his food, an adulterous wife on her (negligent) husband, a (sinning) pupil or sacrificer on (their negligent) teacher (or priest), a thief on the king (who pardons him).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/318_rAjabhiH_kRtadaNDAs.md">
<details open><summary><h3>318 राजभिः कृतदण्डास् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

राजभिः कृतदण्डास् तु  
कृत्वा पापानि मानवाः [मेधातिथिपाठः - राजभिर् धृतदण्डास् तु] ।  
निर्-मलाः स्वर्गम् आयान्ति  
सन्तः सुकृतिनो यथा  ॥ ८.३१८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/318_rAjabhiH_kRtadaNDAs.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Men who, having committed crimes, have been punished by Kings, become freed from guilt and go to heaven, just like well-behaved good men.—(318)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद् उक्तं पापकारिणो निग्रहणे कर्मकृतो रक्षन्त इति तत् स्फुटयति । **धृतो** विनिपातितो[^४३] **दण्डो** येषां **राजभिस्** ते **कृत्वा पापानि** कृतपापा राजनिग्रहेण **निर्मला** निरस्तपापा भवन्ति । अपगते च पापे यद् एषां स्वर्गारोहकं[^४४] कर्म तेन स्वर्गं प्राप्नुवन्ति । महद् धि पापं शुद्धस्य कर्मणः फलस्य प्रतिबन्धकम् । **सुकृतिनो** नित्यं सुकृतकर्मकारिणः । यथा सन्तो धार्मिकास्[^४५] तद्वद् । असताम् अधर्मो नैवोत्पद्यते, एषाम् उत्पन्नो निग्रहणेन विनाशित[^४६] इति प्राक्प्रध्वंसाभावयोर् विशेषः । 


[^४६]:
     M G: vinā sthita


[^४५]:
     M G: sattrī dhārmikas


[^४४]:
     M G: svargārohikaṃ


[^४३]:
     M G: vinipātite

**मानव**ग्रहणान् न प्रकरणाच् चौराणाम् एव । **दण्ड्**अशब्दस् तु शारीरनिग्रहविषयो न हि प्रकरणम् अतिक्रामति । धनदण्डो हि राजार्थः । वृत्तिर् हि सा[^४७] राज्ञः । शारीरे तु दण्डे दण्ड्यमानार्थता न[^४८] शक्यते निह्नोतुम्, त्वक्संस्कारो हि सा[^४९] । अथेयं बुद्धिः- पालनम् एव हिंसाम् अन्तरेण न निष्पाद्यते, तच् च राजार्थम् इति कुतो मार्यमाणार्थता मारणस्य । अथ किम् पालनं न पाल्यमानार्थं दृष्टम्[^५०] एवापह्नूयते । न हि तद्राष्ट्रम् उपादेयं राज्ञैव स्वरक्षार्थं करशुल्कादिभृत्या उपादीयन्ते । अतः सुतरां रक्षोपयोगित्वे[^५१] हिंसायां न[^५२] हिंस्यमानार्थतासिद्धिः । कथं वा हिंसया विना न रक्षानिर्वृत्तिर् यदि तावद् एवमर्थं निगृह्यन्ते पुनर् अकार्यम् आवर्तयिष्यते तन्निरोधनादिनापि[^५३] शक्यते नियन्तुम् । अथ तान् निगृहीतान् दृष्ट्वा[^५४] भयाद् अन्ये न प्रवर्तयिष्यन्त इति धनदण्डेनापि शक्यते दुःखयितुम् । हन्यमानेष्व् अपि सहस्रशः प्रवर्तन्ते । तस्माद् इयं हिंसा रक्षा सती हिंस्यमानसंस्कार इति मन्तव्यम् । अतश् च करणादिछेदने[^५५] नियमः । हस्त्यादिविधिश् च दण्ड्येष्वेवादृष्टम्[^५६] आधास्यति, न राजार्थो भविष्यति । 



[^५६]:
     M G DK: daṇḍye 'dṛṣṭam


[^५५]:
     M G J: kāraṇādi-


[^५४]:
     M G: tān gṛhītvā tān dṛṣṭvā


[^५३]:
     M G: tannibodhanād api; DK: tannirodhanād api


[^५२]:
     M G DK omit: na


[^५१]:
     M G DK: -yogitvaṃ


[^५०]:
     M G DK: - ārthadṛṣṭam


[^४९]:
     M G DK: hiṃsā


[^४८]:
     M G omit: na


[^४७]:
     M G: yā

- तस्माच् छरीरदण्डे पापान् मुक्तिर् न धनदण्ड इति स्थितम् । तथा च महापातकिनां हृतसर्वस्वानाम् अप्सु प्रवेशितदण्डानां संव्यवहारपरिहारार्थम् अङ्कनं वक्ष्यति । यदि च धनदण्डेन शुध्येयुः पुनर् अङ्कनम् अनर्थकं स्यात् । 

अत्र च स्वयम् आगतस्य नानीतस्य विशेषो यः स्तेन एव[^५७] विशेषो भवतु । इदं तु सर्वं शारीरदण्डविषयम् ॥ ८.३१८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been said above that by suppressing criminals the King protects
the well-behaved. This same idea is further clearly stated.

Those on whom punishments have been inflicted by the King,—such men
‘*having committed crimes, become freed from guilt*,’ by the punishment
meted out by the King; *i.e*., their sin becomes set aside.

Their sins set aside, they go to heaven, by virtue of those acts of
theirs which entitle them to enter heaven. A serious crime stands in the
way of the fruition of meritorions acts.

Like the men who are ‘*well-behaved*’—those who constantly perform
meritorious acts; and are hence ‘*good*’—righteous.

The difference between the two is that in the case of the good men,
there has been no guilt at all, while in the case of criminals, it has
come about, but has been destroyed by the punishment; so that in the
former case there is prior negation, while in the latter there is
negation by destruction.

The use of the term ‘*men*’ in the text indicates that what is stated
here does not refer to *thieves* only.

The term ‘punishment’ however continues to stand for *corporeal
punishment*., and hence does not go beyond the sense in which it has
been used in the present context.

Punishment in the form of fine’s comes useful to the king,—that being
his means of livelihood; but in the ease of corporeal punishment it
cannot be denied that if it is useful to any one; it must be so to the
person punished; because the hurt inflicted therein affects the man’s
skin.

In this connection, people may have the following idea:—“Protection of
the people is not possible without hurting (criminals), and protection
serves the purposes of the king; how then can the corporeal punishment
be held to serve the purpose of the person punished?”

Is this argument meant to deny the palpable fact that *protection* is
useful for the *protected people*? Certainly it cannot be said that the
king employs all his officers only for the purposes of his own
protection. If again, the corporeal punishment served the useful purpose
of ‘protection’ only, it could not he regarded as useful for the person
punished. Further, why should ‘protection’ of the people be not possible
without the ‘hurt’ (involved in the punishment)? If the hurt is
inflicted with the idea that if the man were not punished, he would
repeat the act,—this purpose could be served even by reprimanding and
such other means. If the idea he that on seeing him punished others
would desist from similar acts,—the suffering meant to be caused could
be brought about even by lines. Then again, even though criminals are
punished, thousands of men are found to do the same act again and again.

From all this it follows that the corporeal punishment, while ‘ending to
‘protection’ (of the people), has to be regarded as serving the purpose
of purifying the person punished. It is for this reason that there are
rules laid down regarding the cutting off of limbs and other forms of
corporeal punishment. All this produces an invisible effeet in the
persons punished, and at the same time serves the purposes of the king
(in the form of protection).

Thus it is established that the criminals become absolved from guilt
only when there is corporeal punishment, and not when they are only
fined.

It is for this same reason that in connection with the most heinous
offenders, whoso entire property has been confiscated, and who have, by
way of punishment, been made to stand in water,—*branding* has been
prescribed, with a view to guard against people associating with them.
If they became purified by the fine, any such branding would be futile.

In the present context, the special rules that have been laid down in
regard to the criminal who has surrendered himself, and has not been
arrested and brought up for trial, may refer to *thieves* only; but what
is said in the present verse is meant to apply to *all* corporeal
punishments.—(318)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (3.259), which notes that this
refers to the death-penalty;—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 120), to the
effect that punishment serves to absolve one from the sin of the crime.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Vaśiṣṭha* (19.45).—‘Men who have committed offences and have received
from Kings the punishment due to them, go purified to heaven and are as
holy as the virtuous.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रकरणात् स्तेयपापनिर्हरणविषयम् एव निर्मलवचनं, येन स्तेयनिमित्तम् एवेदं अस्य प्रायश्चित्तम् । अतो युक्तम् इदम् । यत् ते **निर्मलाः स्वर्गम्** आगच्छेयुः, पूर्वोपात्तेन स्वर्गारोहणिकेन कुशलकर्मणा । एवं च सत्य् उभयोर् अप्य् अनया शिष्टक्रियया तत्कालोपकारसंबन्धापेक्षायाम् इदं राजाभिगमनपक्षे प्रशंसावचनं, न निर्बीजम् इति ॥ ८.३१७ ॥

_इदानीम् अन्यत् स्तेयसंबन्धेनेदम् आह ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

318	But men who have committed crimes and have been punished by the king, go to heaven, being pure like those who performed meritorious deeds.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/319_yas_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>319 यस् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यस् तु रज्जुं घटं कूपाद्  
धरेद् भिन्द्याच् च यः प्रपाम् ।  
स दण्डं प्राप्नुयान् माषं  
तच् च तस्मिन् समाहरेत्  ॥ ८.३१९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/319_yas_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When one steals the rope or the water-pot from the well, or damages a water-drinking establishment, he should be punished with a fine of one ‘māṣa,’ and should restore the article to the place.—(319)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

प्रपिबन्त्य् अस्याम् इति **प्रपा**, जलाधारस्थानम् उद्धृतजलनिधानं वा । माषस्य जातिर् न निर्दिष्टा । सा मरुजाङ्गलानूपभेदा[^५८] द्रष्टव्या । **तच् च** रज्ज्वादि **समाहरेद्** दद्यात् तस्मिन् स्थाने, न राजनि ॥ ८.३१९ ॥


[^५८]:
     J: -bhedād
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

A place where people drink water is called ‘*prapā*,’ ‘*water-drinking
establishment*,’ the place where water is stored after having been drawn
from a reservoir.

The exact nature of the substance is not stated—of what substance the
fine of a ‘*māṣa*’ shall consist. It should he regarded as being copper
or silver.

The article—rope and the rest—ho shall restore ‘*to the place*’ and not
to the king.—(319)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Māṣam*’—‘Of gold’ (Kullūka);—‘the exact metal has not been mentioned;
it has to be determined on the merits of each case, according as the
institution damaged happens to he in a desert or in a country with
plentiful water-supply and so forth’ (Medhātithi, whom Buhler has
misrepresented).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 328), which adds the
following notes:—The meaning is that—‘that’, the damaged article,—in the
shape of the rope or the jar—he shall restore to the well. The
*Pārijata*, in view of the later pronoun ‘*tat*’ has read
‘*rājjughaṭam*’ and has explained it as a ‘collective copulative
compound’;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 141), which reads
‘*rajjughaṭam*’ and explains it as ‘the rope or the jar’, and explains
the rule as that ‘one who steals the rope or the jar should replace it,
and he who damages the drinking-booth should be fined a *Māṣa*.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

माषो मुख्यत्वाद् अविशेषाभिधाने सति हिरण्यस्य स्यात् ॥ ८.३१८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

319	He who steals the rope or the water-pot from a well, or damages a hut where water is distributed, shall pay one masha as a fine and restore the (article abstracted or damaged) in its (proper place).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/320_dhAnyan_dashabhyaH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>320 धान्यन् दशभ्यः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

धान्यं दशभ्यः कुम्भेभ्यो  
हरतो ऽभ्यधिकं वधः ।  
शेषे ऽप्य् एकादशगुणं  
दाप्यस् तस्य च तद् धनम्  ॥ ८.३२० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/320_dhAnyan_dashabhyaH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

There shall be ‘immolation’ for one who steals more than ten jars of grain; in other cases he should he made to pay eleven times as much, as also make good the property to the owner.—(320)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**कुम्भ**शब्दः परिमाणविशेषे वर्तते न घटमात्रे । क्वचिद् विंशतिप्रस्थान् क्वचिद् द्वाविंशतिर् इति देशभेदाद् व्यवस्था । **दशभ्यो ऽधिकं हरतो** वधविधिर् उक्तार्थो ऽनुबन्धादिना नियम्यते । **शेषेषु** दशसु प्राकृत एकादशगुणो दण्डः । तत् **तस्य**[^५९] **च तद् धनम्** इति सर्वत्र स्तेये योज्यम् । **धान्यं** व्रीहियवादिसप्तदशानीति स्मर्यते ॥ ८.३२० ॥


[^५९]:
     M G: tat tasya
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*jar*’ is used in the sense of a particular measure, and not
in that of one *jarful* only. The exact quantity is sometimes 20 seers,
and in others 22 seers according to the custom of the place.

He who steals more than ten ‘jars,’ should be punished with
‘immolation.’ This rule is relaxed in accordance with the circumstances
attending each case.

‘*In* *the rest*,’—*i.e*., in the case of ten jars and less,—the fine
shall be eleven times the quantity stolen.

‘*The property shall be made good to the owner*’;—this applies to all
cases of theft.

‘*Grain*’—under this term are included seventeen things—the *Vrīhi*, the
*Yava* and so forth,—as mentioned in the *Smṛtis*.—(320)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kumbha*’—‘Equivalent to 20 or 22 *Prasthas* of 32 *Palas* each’
(Medhātithi);—‘to 2 *Droṇas* of 200 *Palas* each’ (Govindarājā, Kullūka
and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 513), where, Kātyāyana is
quoted as making ‘*kumbha*’ equivalent to 20 *droṇas*;—in *Aparārka* (p.
846), which has the following notes:—The *kumbha* is equivalent 52
*droṇas*;—‘*vadha’* is to be inflicted on the man who steals more than
20 *kumbhas* of paddy; in ‘other cases’—*i.e*., where the quantity
stolen is not large—the thief should be made to pay a fine which is
eleven times that which is prescribed for cases of stealing paddy (?);
and the quantity stolen has to be restored to the owner.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.275) as indicating the fact that the
penalty varies with the quantity of grain stolen; it adds the following
notes:—The *kumbha* is equal to 20 *droṇas*,—whether the ‘*vadha*’
prescribed here is to be *beating* or *mutilation* or *death* shall
depend upon (1) the qualities of the thief, of the corn stolen and of
the owner of the corn, and (2) upon the time, whether it is a time of
scarcity or plenty;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 151a), which
explains ‘*kumbha*’ as 10 *seers*, ‘*śeṣe*’ as ‘less than ten
kumbhas—‘*tasya*’ as ‘to the owner of the grain.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 311), which has the following
notes:—The *kumbha* consists of 10 *prasthas*,—‘*śeṣe*’, less than 10
*kumbhas*,—the property that had been stolen should be restored to the
owner.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 101), which explains ‘*kumbha*’
as 10 *prasthas*;—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 341), which says that
this refers to eases of serious crime.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.12).—‘Those who steal more than 10 *kumbhas* of grain, should
be put to death.’

*Nārada* (Theft: 26).—‘Corporal punishment or death shall he inflicted
on him who steals more than 10 *kumbhas* of grain; when the quantity is
less, he shall be made to pay eleven times the value—thus has Manu
ordained.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ताडने ऽपि वधः प्रयुज्यते । इह तु यदि ब्राह्मणादिषु प्रस्परे च धान्यापहरणे इदम्; हीनवर्णश् च स्याद् अयम् अपहर्ता, ततो [दोष]महत्त्वात् तस्य न नैर्गुण्याद् विधिर् मारणे द्रष्टव्यः । अन्यत्र तु कल्पना स्वयम् एवोह्या । दशानां चार्वाग् **एकादशगुणो** दण्डो, न **वधः** ॥ ८.३१९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

320	On him who steals more than ten kumbhas of grain corporal punishment (shall be inflicted); in other cases he shall be fined eleven times as much, and shall pay to the (owner the value of his) property.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/321_tathA_dharimameyAnAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>321 तथा धरिममेयानाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

तथा धरिममेयानां  
शताद् अभ्यधिके वधः ।  
सुवर्ण-रजतादीनाम्  
उत्तमानां च वाससाम्  ॥ ८.३२१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/321_tathA_dharimameyAnAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case or articles weighed by scales,—gold, silver and the rest,—if more than a hundred (are stolen),
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

धरणं धरिमा, तुला, तेन मीयन्ते परिछिद्यन्ते तानि **धर्ममेयानि** । घृतादीनां द्रवाणां प्रस्थादिमेयतास्तीति, कठिनानां परिमेयता भवतीति, तद् अर्थम् आह **सुवर्णरजतादीनाम्** । **आदि**ग्रहणाद् एव रजते लब्धे पुनर् उपादानात् तुल्यग्रहणार्थात् प्रवालादीनि गृह्यन्ते, न तु ताम्रलोहादीनि । तेषां शताद् ऊर्ध्वं हरणे वधः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;किं पुनर् एतच् छतं पलानाम् उत कर्षाणाम् एव कार्षापणानां वा । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;केचिद् आहुः पलानाम् इति । 

न त्व् अत्र विशेषे[^६०] हेतुर्[^६१] अस्ति । तस्माद् यस्मिन् देशे धर्ममानकाले यया[^६२] संख्यया व्यवहारः, शतम्[^६३] इदं सुवर्णस्य, क्वचित् तोलके क्वचित् पलेषु, यथादेशं व्यवस्था । 


[^६३]:
     M G: śrutam


[^६२]:
     M G: yathā


[^६१]:
     M G: hantur


[^६०]:
     M G DK (1: 1716): viśeṣo

**उत्तमानां च वाससां** कौशेयपट्टादीनाम् इति ।[^६४] **शताद् अभ्यधिके वधः**[^६५] इत्य् अनुषङ्गः । अत्रापि शाटकयुगम्[^६६] एकम् इति संख्यायते । पुष्पपटाद्युपबर्हणं त्व् एकम् एवेति । 


[^६६]:
     M G: śākaṭakayugam


[^६५]:
     M G add: kecid āhuḥ | palānām iti | na tva atra viśeṣahetur


[^६४]:
     M G add: nanv atra viśeṣahetur asti | tasmād yasmin

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च सुवर्णरजतादीनाम् इत्य् एव सिद्धे परिमेयग्रहणम् अनर्थकम् । 

<u>नानर्थक,</u> कर्पूरागुरुकस्तूरिकादीनां महार्घाणां ग्रहणार्थम् । **आदि**ग्रहणाद् धि तैजसानि गृह्यन्ते, निष्कादिपरिमाणव्यपदेश्यानि वा । न हि कर्पूरादीनां कर्षादिव्यपदेशो ऽस्ति । यद्य् अपि सुवर्णवद् रजते ऽपि शतसंख्या तथापि प्रायश्चित्तभेदवद् दण्डभेदो ऽपि युक्तो विषमसमीकरणस्यान्याय्यत्वात्[^६७] । अतो यावत् सुवर्णगतस्य मूल्यं तावति रूप्ये[^६८] गृहीते वधः । कर्पूरादीनां तु पलानाम् एव शतसंख्या ॥ ८.३२१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Dharima*’—scales;—things weighed by means of scales are called
‘*dhrimameya*.’

In as much as clarified butter and other liquid substances are weighed
by the seer and other measures, people might think that solid substances
are not meant here; hence the author has added—‘*gold, silver and the
rest*.’

Since *silver* would have been included under the phrase ‘*and the
rest*,’ its special mention may be taken to indicate that what are meant
are only such things as are equal to it in value; it is thus that coral
and other precious stones become included, but not copper, iron and Such
things.

Of these things, if more than a hundred is stolen, there shall be
‘*immolation*.’

“What is it of which there should be a *hundred*? A hundred ‘*palas*’ or
‘*karṣas*’ or ‘*kārṣāpaṇas*’?”

Some people say that ‘hundred *palas*’ are meant.

But there is no ground available for restricting it to any particular
measure. Hence it should be taken as referring to that particular
measure which, in the country concerned, happens to be the standard of
weighment by scales. The expression ‘a hundred of gold’ pertains, in
some places, to ‘*tolās*’ and in others to ‘*palas*’; hence the rule is
to be interpreted in accordance with local usage.

‘*Also in the ease of fine clothes*,’—snoh as silken and coloured
raiments; here also we have to construe the words—

‘*if there are more than a hundred, there shall be immolation*.’ In the
case of *Sārīs* two pieces (pair) are counted as ‘one,’ while in that of
flowered wrappers and such other clothes, it is only one piece.

“In as much as the phrase ‘*gold, silver and the rest*’ would have
sufficed to express what is meant, it was entirety useless to add the
term ‘*things weighed by scales*.’

It has been added for the purpose of including such high-priced things
as camphor, *aguru*, musk and so forth. The phrase ‘and the rest’ (used
along with ‘gold and silver’) includes only the igneous substances
(metals), or only such substances as are weighed in ‘*niṣkas*’ and other
measures, which are not applicable to camphor and other like things.

Though the limit of ‘a hundred’ is put down in regard to both gold and
silver, yet, in actual practice a distinction has to be made in the
penalty inflicted in the two cases; just as there is in the expiatory
rite imposed in connection with them; and this for the simple reason
that things distinctly unequal should not be treated as equal. Hence in
the case of silver, there is to be ‘immolation’ only if the value of the
quantity stolen is equivalent to ‘a hundred of gold.’

In the case of camphor and other things, the number ‘hundred’ would
pertain to ‘*palas*.’—(321)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Dharimameyānām suvarṇarajatādīnām*’—‘Articles weighed by scales such
as gold, silver, &c.,’ (Medhātithi; Govindarāja and Kullūka);—‘articles
measured by weight, *i*. *e*., copper and the rest, other than gold and
silver, *and* of gold, silver, &c.’ (Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 847), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Dharimameya*’ are those things that are measured by
scales,—*i.e*., ‘gold, silver and so forth’.—If the author had only the
expression ‘*suvarṇarajatādīnām*’, ‘gold, silver &c.,’ then iron and
other metals also would become included; similarly if he had only
‘*dharimameyānām*’ ‘things weighed by scales’, then molasses and such
other things also would become included; by having both, even such
articles as pearls, corals and the like, which also are ‘weighed by
scales,’ become included; these latter also belong to the same category
as ‘gold and silver’ by reason of their being highly valuable; the term
‘*ādi*’, means ‘and the like thus it is that such things as molasses,
even though they are ‘weighed by scales’, become excluded; because,
being cheap, they have no *similarity* to ‘gold and silver’; for the
same reason such cheap metals as iron, lead and so forth are not
included here,—‘*uttamāni vāsāṃsi*’, ‘excellent clothes’, clothes of
*patra*, (?) *ūrṇa* (wool), *netra* (?) *paṭī* (silk, and so forth).

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 102);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p.
323), which explains ‘*dharima*’ as ‘weight’;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī*
(p. 987);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 152a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (15.13).—‘One who steals more than a hundred *māṣas* of such
things as arc usually sold by weight, shall be put to death.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 27).—‘For stealing more than a hundred *palas* of gold,
silver or other precious metals, or valuable clothes, or very precious
gems, corporal punishment or death shall be inflicted.’

*Bṛhaspati* (22.27).—‘In the case of stealing women, men, gold, gems,
silk and other precious things, the fine shall be equal to the value of
the thing stolen; or double the amount shall be inflicted by the King as
fine; or the thief shall be executed, to prevent a repetition of the
offence.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.275).—‘Punishments shall be inflicted in accordance
with the nature of the thing stolen, as to its being trifling, mediocre
or of high class; and in inflicting punishments, the time, place, age
and capacity should be taken into consideration.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 324).—‘For stealing gold and gems,
corporal punishment.’

*Arthaśāstra* (Do., p. 100).—‘For stealing gems and metals, the fine
shall be of the value of the article stolen, say the followers of
Manu,—double the value, say the followers of Uśanas; it shall be in
keeping with the nature of the crime, says Kauṭilya.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

धरिम्णा] तुलया यानि मीयन्ते तानि **धर्ममेयानि** सुवर्णादीनि । सुवर्णादिग्रहणं च घृतादिन्वृत्त्यर्थम् । तथा चानन्तरम् एव घृतादीनां तन्मूल्याद् (?) द्विगुणं दमं वक्ष्यति । [एवं च] "सुवर्णरजतादीनाम्" इत्य् एवमादि ग्रहणं सर्वलोहोपसंग्रहार्थम् । ये पुनः धर्मेभ्यः पृथङ्मेयान्य् आचक्षते धान्यादीनि तेषां "धान्यं दशभ्यः कुम्भेभ्यः" इत्य् अनेनेदं पुनरुक्तम् आपद्यते । घृतादीनां च मेयत्वे कल्प्यमाने वक्ष्यमाणैर् घृतादिभिः पौनरुक्त्यम् । यतस् तथा **धरिममेयानाम्** इत्य् अस्य यथोक्त एव विग्रहः । **उत्तमानां च वाससां** नवादीनाम् ॥ ८.३२० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

321	So shall corporal punishment be inflicted for stealing more than a hundred (palas) of articles sold by the weight, (i.e.) of gold, silver, and so forth, and of most excellent clothes.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/322_panchAshatas_tv.md">
<details open><summary><h3>322 पञ्चाशतस् त्व् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पञ्चाशतस् त्व् अभ्यधिके  
हस्तच्छेदनम् इष्यते ।  
शेषे त्व् एकादशगुणं  
मूल्याद् दण्डं प्रकल्पयेत्  ॥ ८.३२२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/322_panchAshatas_tv.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of more than fifty, the cutting off of the hands is prescribed. In other cases, the king shall inflict a fine of eleven times the value.—(322)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सुबोधो ऽयम् । **मूल्याद्** इति- नापहृतम् एव द्रव्यं देय, क्वचित् तज्जातीयं नैव प्राप्यते । अतो रूपकैर् धान्यादिना वा विनिमेयम्[^६९] ॥ ८.३२२ ॥


[^६९]:
     M G: nimeyam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse is easily understood.

‘*Eleven times the value*.’—It is not only that the stolen article is to
be restored; for sometimes it may so happen that a thing of the same
kind is not available. Hence money or grain may be given in
exchange.—(322)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 323);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 152a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.81-82).—‘A stealer of gold, silver, or clothes of a value of
more than fifty *māṣas*, shall lose both hands; he who steals a less
amount than that shall pay eleven times its value as fine.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 27).—(See under 321.)

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 323).—‘For the stealing of things sold by
weight, grains and nuts, and other things more valuable than wood and
the vest, the fine shall be ten times the value of the article stolen.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अधिके पञ्चाशतो हस्तच्छेदः । ऊने ऽप्य् एकादशगुणो दण्डः ॥ ८.३२१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

322	For (stealing) more than fifty (palas) it is enacted that the hands (of the offender) shall be cut off; but in other cases, let him inflict a fine of eleven times the value.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/323_puruShANA~N_kulInAnAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>323 पुरुषाणाङ् कुलीनानाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पुरुषाणां कुलीनानां  
नारीणां च विशेषतः ।  
मुख्यानां चैव रत्नानां  
हरणे वधम् अर्हति  ॥ ८.३२३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/323_puruShANA~N_kulInAnAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For stealing noble men, and specially women, and the precious gems, the thief deserves ‘immolation.’—(323)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सत्कुले जाता विद्यादिगुणयोगिनः **कुलीनाः । नारीणां च विशेषतो** गुणरूपसौभाग्यसंपन्नानाम्[^७०] इत्य् अर्थः । **च**शब्दात् कुलीनानां इत्य् एव । परस्परापेक्षाणि नारीणां विशेषणानि । **मुख्यानि** उत्तमानि **रत्नानि** वज्रवैडूर्यमरकतप्रभृतीनि । अत्रापि सुवर्णशततुल्यानीत्य् अपेक्ष्यम् । अन्यथोत्तमत्वम् आपेक्षिकम् इति दण्डो न व्यवतिष्ठेत । **वधम् अर्हति** । अनुबन्धाद्यपेक्षया सर्वत्रार्हत्यर्थो[^७१] योजनीयः । अकुलीनानाम् अवशिष्टानाम् अमुख्यानां च "शेषे[^७२] त्व् एकादशगुणम्" (म्ध् ८.३२२) इत्य्[^७३] एव ॥ ८.३२३ ॥


[^७३]:
     M G J DK: ekādaśaguṇa ity; I follow the reading of MDh 8.322 of which this is a citation.


[^७२]:
     M G: viśeṣe; DK: haraṇe


[^७१]:
     J: sarvatra vadhyartho


[^७०]:
     M G: -saubhāgyataḥ saṃpannānām
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Noble*,’—born of good families and possessed of learning and other
good qualities.

‘*Specially women*,’—snoh as are possessed of good qualities, beauty and
grace.

The particle ‘*ca*,’ ‘*and*,’ indicates that ‘*nobility*’ and the other
qualifications are meant, as far as possible, to be applicable to both
‘men’ and ‘women.’

‘*Precious gems*,’—such as diamond, lapis-lazuli, emerald and so forth.

Here also it is to be understood that the articles stolen should he
equivalent in value to ‘a hundred of gold’; otherwise, since the
qualification ‘precious’ is a relative term, there would be no
definiteness in the rule prescribing the punishment.

‘*Deserves immolation*’;—the exact meaning of ‘immolation’ is to be
determined in all cases by the peculiarity of the circumstances of each
individual case.

In the case of the stealing of men and women who are not ‘noble,’ or of
gems that are not ‘precious,’—there shall be a fine eleven times the
value of what is stolen.—(323)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 317), which explains
‘*Kulīnānām*’ as ‘born of good families—and ‘*mukhyānām ratnānām*’ as
‘emerald and the like’,—again at p. 324.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.275), where *Bālambhaṭṭī* has the
following notes:—The reading of the third foot accepted by all is
‘*mukhyānāñcaiva ratnānām*’, and ‘*ratnānāñcaiva sarveṣām*’ is wrong
reading; the meaning is that ‘for stealing persons born of great
families, specially ladies of great families, and also of diamond,
sapphire and other valuable gems, the thief deserves the death-penalty’
in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 344), which says that this clearly refers to
the enticing away of boys and girls of good families, and not of
slaves,—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 134), which explains ‘*mukhya-ratna*’
as standing for the emerald and the rest;—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 152a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (Theft, 28).—‘he who steals a man shall have to pay the highest
fine; he who steals a woman shall be deprived of his entire wealth; and
he who steals a maiden shall suffer corporal punishment.’

*Bṛhaspati* (22. 27-28).—‘In the case of women, men, gold, gems, the
property of a deity or a Brāhmaṇa, silk and other precious things, the
fine shall be equal to the value of the article stolen; or double that
amount shall he inflicted as fine; or the thief shall be executed.’

Do. (22.18; Vivādaratnākara, p. 317)—‘Those who steal human beings
should be burnt by the slow fire of chaff.’

*Vyāsa* (Do.).—‘The stealer of women shall he burnt on an iron bed by
the slow fire of chaff; the stealer of man should have his hands and
feet cut off and then exposed on the road-crossing. He who steals a man
should he fined the highest amercement; he who steals a woman should
have his entire property confiscated; and he who steals a maiden shall
he put to death.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 318).—‘For stealing a king’s son, the fine is
108 *kārṣāpaṇas*, or corporal punishment; half of that for stealing
persons of the royal family, or of men and women in general.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 101).—‘If one forcibly confines, or forcibly releases,
a man or woman, he shall be fined not less than 500 or more than 1,000
*Paṇas*, *i.e*., the highest amercement.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अत्र ह्रियमाणहर्तृजातिगुणापेक्षया विधिप्रपञ्चः कल्पनीयः॥ ८.३२२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

323	For stealing men of noble family and especially women and the most precious gems, (the offender) deserves corporal (or capital) punishment.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/324_mahApashUnAM_haraNe.md">
<details open><summary><h3>324 महापशूनां हरणे ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

महापशूनां हरणे  
शस्त्राणाम् औषधस्य च ।  
कालम् आसाद्य कार्यं च  
दण्डं राजा प्रकल्पयेत्  ॥ ८.३२४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/324_mahApashUnAM_haraNe.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For the stealing of large animals, of weapons or medicines, the king shall determine the punishment, after considering the time and the purpose.—(324)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**महापशवो** हस्त्यश्वादयः । तेषाम् **हरणे** कालकार्यापेक्षा दण्डप्रकॢप्तिः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च सर्वत्रैव कालाद्यपेक्षोक्ता । तथा च "कालदेशवयःशक्तीश् चिन्तयेद् दण्डकर्माणि" (य्ध् २.२७९) इति । 

<u>सत्यम्</u> । विज्ञाते दण्डस्वरूपे न्यूनाधिकभावो ऽनुबन्धाद्यपेक्षः । यथा वधविधौ ताडनमारणादिकल्पनापेक्ष्या । इहात्यन्तविलक्षणो दण्डः । तथा हि विंशतिपणो ऽपि खड्गः शत्रोर् उद्यतशस्त्रस्य संनिधौ यदि ह्रियते तेन कार्यातिशयेन तेन च कालेन मारणं दण्डः । अन्यदा द्विगुण एकादशगुणो वा । तथौषधम् अलभयत्वेन महाप्रयोजनं तदुपयोगवेलायां ह्रियते, लोल्यमानम् अपि क्वाथाद्यपेक्षं कालातिक्रमणेन महदातुरस्य दुःखं जनयतीति, तत्र महान् दण्डः । अन्यदा तु स्वल्प इति । न यत्रान्तराम् अन्तरेणेदृशं वैषम्यं लभ्यते । अन्यथा स एवैकः श्लोको दण्डविधौ पठितव्यः स्यात् । तस्माद् वक्तव्यम् इदम् । विग्रहकाले ऽश्वादीनां राज्यापेक्षो दण्डः । शस्त्राणां राजोपयोगिनां कदाचित् क्षमा कदाचिन् महान् दण्डः । गोमहीष्यादीनां तु प्रजासंबन्धिनां न राज्ञा क्षन्तव्य । कार्यं च यद् अश्वादिभिः कर्तव्यं तद् अप्य् अपेक्ष्यम्[^७४] । विग्रहो ऽ पि यदि पर्वतादौ भवति यत्र नातीवाश्वैः प्रयोजनं भवत्य् एव दण्डह्रासः[^७५] ।  
**कालम् आसाद्य** ज्ञात्वा निरूप्य **दण्डं** **कल्पयेत्** । स एवात्र प्रभवति,[^७६] न[^७७] शास्त्रम् ॥ ८.३२४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Large animals*,’—the elephant, the horse and so forth. For stealing
these the punishment is to be determined in accordance with ‘*the time
and the purpose*.’

“In connection with all punishments, it has been declared that the time
should be taken into consideration; *e.g*., it is said—‘In the
inflicting of punishments, the king shall take into consideration, the
time, place, age and capacity?”

True; in ordinary cases the nature of the punishment is already fixed,
and the said circumstances are taken into consideration only for the
purpose of determining the exact degree of that punishment; *e.g*., in
cases where the penalty is put down as ‘immolation,’ whether it is to be
actual *death* or only *beating*, could be determined by circumstances.
In the case in question on the other hand, the nature of the punishment
is peculiarly variable; *e.g*., even though the sword may be worth only
twenty *paṇas*, yet if it is stolen at a time when an enemy with
uplifted weapon is near at hand,—the punishment would be *death*; in
view of the time and the extremely useful purpose that would have been
served by the stolen sword; while under other circumstances, there would
be only a fine, either double, or eleven times, the value of the sword.
Similarly in the case of a medicine that is not easily available, and is
extremely useful, being stolen at the very time at which it was going to
be used,—or if, when easily available, it is stolen at the time when it
has been just boiled, and if not taken at that very time, would cause
great suffering to the patient,—the punishment in such cases would be
most severe; in other cases, it would be small. There could be no such
diversity unless there be some sort of difference in the cases.
Otherwise it would suffice to put down only one verse as embodying the
whole law of punishments. Hence the following statements have to be
made—‘At the time of war, the penalty for stealing a horse and such
animals would depend on the needs of the king;—in the case of weapons
needed by the king, it would be forgiven in some oases, while in others
the punishment meted out would he very severe;—in the case of cows and
buffaloes belonging to the people, the theft should never be forgiven by
the king;—in the ease of horses too, it would all depend upon the
purpose served by them; *e.g*., if the war is being waged in a hilly
country, the horse would not be of much use there; so that if it be
stolen, the punishment should not he very severe. Thus our sole guide in
this matter is the maxim *that the king shall determine the penalty
after considering the time*.—(324)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

[*Cf*.
8.26.]

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 319), which adds the
following notes—‘*Mahāpaśu*’ are the elephant and other large
animals,—‘*kālam*’, whether it was stolen at the time of war, or during
ordinary use and so forth,—‘*kāryam*’, smallness or largeness of the use
to which the stolen thing was being put,—‘*daṇḍam*’, heavier or lighter.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.324-325)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (5.77-78).—‘He who has stolen a cow, or a horse, or a camel, or
an elephant, shall have one hand, or one foot cut off;—he who has stolen
a goat, or a sheep shall have one hand cut off.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 29).—‘On him who forcibly seizes large domestic
animals—the highest fine shall be inflicted; the middlemost amercement
on him who steals cattle of the middle size; and the smallest fine on
him who steals small cattle.’

Do. (Do., 33).—‘For stealing cows belonging to a Brāhmaṇa, for piercing
the nostrils of a barren cow, and for stealing a female slave, the thief
shall, in every case, lose half his feet.’

*Bṛhaspati* (22, 26).—‘One injuring or stealing cattle, clothes, food,
drinks, or household utensils shall be compelled to pay a fine of not
less than 200 *Paṇas*.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.273).—‘Stealers of horses and elephants shall be
impaled.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 845).—‘The stealer of horses is killed by having
his hands, feet and loin cut off; the stealer of cattle has half of his
feet cut off by a sharp weapon.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 101).—‘For stealing large cattle, human beings,
fields, houses, gold, fine doth, and such things, the fine shall be not
less than 200 or more than 500 *Paṇas*, *i.e*., the middle amercement.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**महापशवो** हस्त्यश्वोष्ट्रादयः, दृष्टोपकारमहत्त्वात् । परिमाणतश् च महापशवो राज्ञस् तत्प्रकृतीनां चैते सामर्थाद् विशेषतो विज्ञेयाः शस्त्रग्रहणसाहचर्याच् च । तानि राजहितगोचन एव महान्ति गुणतः शस्त्राणि प्रायेण भवन्ति । तथा महच् छब्दो ऽत्राधिकारार्थ विज्ञेयः । एवम् **औषधम्** अपि व्याख्येयम् । एतेषां हरणे **कालम् आसाद्य** राजा विग्रहेतरलक्षणं देशविप्लवरूपं वा दुर्भिक्षसुभिक्षाख्यं वा, **कार्यं महापशूनाम्** अपहरणप्रयुजनं विज्ञाय, किं द्यूतादिप्रयोजन एषाम् अपहारः, अथ वैरानुबन्धेन, उत क्षुदवसन्नात्मकुटुम्बस्वतन्त्रस्य तत्स्थित्यर्थं धर्मायैव नासदुपयोगाय । **दण्डं राजा प्रकल्पयेद्** इति प्रकृतम् अनन्तरम् एव धान्यश्लोके वधम् अवधम् एकादशगुणमूल्यं वा दण्डं देशकालकार्यावस्थां विज्ञाय जातिगुणं वापहर्तुः । उक्तं चैतद् दण्डविधिश्लोके "अनुबन्धं परिज्ञाय" इत्य् एवम् आदिः ॥ ८.३२३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

324	For stealing large animals, weapons, or medicines, let the king fix a punishment, after considering the time and the purpose (for which they were destined).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/325_goShu_brAhmaNasaMsthAsu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>325 गोषु ब्राह्मणसंस्थासु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

गोषु ब्राह्मणसंस्थासु  
छुरिकायाश् च भेदने [मेधातिथिपाठः - खरिकायाश् च] ।  
पशूनां हरणे चैव  
सद्यः कार्यो ऽर्धपादिकः  ॥ ८.३२५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/325_goShu_brAhmaNasaMsthAsu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For stealing cows belonging to a Brāhmaṇa, and for piercing them with the goad, and for stealing animals, the thief should be immediately made half-footed.—(325)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**ब्राह्मणसंस्था** ब्राह्मणाश्रिता ब्राह्मणस्वामिकाः । तासां **हरणे** । षष्ठ्यर्थे सप्तमी । **पशूनां** चाजैडकादीनाम् । बहुवचनं सर्वत्राविवक्षितम्[^७९] । **सद्यस्** तत्क्षणाद् अविचार्य । पादस्यार्धम् अर्धपादम्, तद् अस्यास्तीत्य् **अर्धपादिकः** । तच् च संभवति यदि पादार्धं[^८०] तेन छिद्यते । तेनार्धपादछेदनं कर्तव्यम् इति वाक्यार्थः । **खरिका**[^८१] यया गोरथक्षेत्रादौ[^८२] वाह्यते बलीवर्दः । **भेदने** वाह्यमानायाः प्रतोदेन पीडोत्पादने । 


[^८२]:
     M G: gorakṣaikṣetrādau


[^८१]:
     M G: churikā


[^८०]:
     M G add: tena


[^७९]:
     M G DK: sarvatrātra vivakṣitam

- "भेदनं" वाहानाम् उपलक्षणार्थं व्याचक्षते <u>पूर्वे</u> । अवश्यं[^८३] वाहयन् दुःखयति । प्रतोदेन वाहने एवायं दण्ड इत्य् <u>अन्ये</u> पठन्ति[^८४] । 


[^८४]:
     M G DK: avaśyam ayaṃ daṇḍa ity evānye paṭhanti


[^८३]:
     M G DK (1: 1713): vyācakṣate | pūrvo

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु पादस्य पश्चाद् भागं चतुर्थं खरिकाम् आहुः । खरिकेति या प्रसिद्धा पलायनशीला यां पालो ऽन्य् वा भिन्दन्न् अर्धपादिकः कार्यः[^८५] । 


[^८५]:
     M G DK: palāyanaśīlāyāḥ pālo 'rdhapādikaḥ kāryaḥ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये त्व् अधिकरणसप्तमीं मत्वा गोसंस्थदध्यादीन्य् अध्याहरन्ति । 

<u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । श्रुतपदसंबन्धसंभवे कृतो ऽध्याहारः ॥ ८.३२५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Belonging to Brāhmaṇas*,’— kept by Brāhmaṇas, owned by Brāhmaṇas;—for
stealing such cows;—the Locative ending in ‘*goṣu*’ has the sense of the
Genitive.

‘*Animals*’—goats, sheep and so forth. No significance is meant to be
attached to the plural number in the words here used.

‘*Immediately*,’—at the very moment; without hesitation.

‘*Ardhapādikaḥ*,’ ‘half-footed’;—‘*ardhapāda*’ means *half of the foot*;
and he who has only half of his foot-left is called ‘half-footed’; and
one becomes so only if half of his foot is cut off. Hence what the
sentence means is ‘that half of the thief’s foot should he cut off.’

‘*Kharikā*,’ ‘goad,’ is that by which oxen are driven in chariots or
fields.—‘*Piercing*,’—causing pain by driving with the goad. The term
‘*piercing*’ has been explained by the older writers as standing for
*driving*; and certainly the man causes pain to the animal by *driving*
it. Others hold that the punishment laid down is to be inflicted only
when the *driving it* done *with the goad*.

Others explain the term ‘*Kharikā*’ as meaning the *hind quarters of*
the animal. (And what would be punished, ac cording to this
interpretation, would he *the piercing of the hind* *quarters of cows*.)

If however ‘*Kharikā*’ is taken as standing for the cow that has the
evil habit of running away,—then the keeper or someone else who pierces
such the cow, should be made ‘half-footed.’

Others interpret the Locative in ‘*goṣu*’ literally, and explain the
words as referring to the theft of cows and other products of the milk
of cows, by supplying additional words.

But this cannot he right. For so long as sense can be made out of the
words as they stand, why should any additional words be supplied?—(325)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Kharikāyāśca bhedane*’—Medhātithi is misrepresented by Buhler.
Medhātithi’s reading is ‘*khārikāyāḥ*’ and the ‘*kharikā*’ he explains
as ‘*yayā gorakṣaiḥ kṣetrādau vāhyate balīvardaḥ*’, ‘that whereby the ox
is driven by the ox-keeper in the fields and other places’; so
apparently the *driving goad* is meant. Buhler has relied upon the
reading of Ms. 8, which reads the sentence as ‘*sthurikā yo
gorathakṣetrādiṣu vāhyate balīvardaḥ*’; this reading involves the
discrepancy of the feminine noun ‘*sthurikā*’ being taken as the ox;
which discrepancy need not be accepted in the face of the better reading
in the printed text (of Mandlik); ‘*bhedane*’ thus means ‘piercing’
(with the goad)—Kullūka and Rāghavānanda, reading ‘*churikā* and
‘*sthurikā*’ explain it as ‘the barren cow’ and ‘*bhedane*’ as piercing
of the nose;—Nārāyaṇa explains it as *the load of* *the ox*, and
‘*bhedane*’ as ‘cutting open and stealing’;—Nandana explains the word as
a particular spot on the back of the ox.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 319), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Sphurikā*’ (which is its reading for ‘*kharikā*’) is
the *barren cow*,—‘*bhedana*’ is ‘the piercing of the nose for purposes
of driving—‘*paśūnām*’, the animals meant here are all smaller animals
except the sheep, the cat and the mongoose;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p.
135), which says that ‘*tūlikā*’ means ‘the nostrils’, and *bhedana*’
means ‘boring.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.324-325)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.324].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पूर्वश्लोके तु महापशुग्रहणेन यद् गोर् अग्रहणं ततो ऽस्य विशेषार्थ आरम्भः । अथ पुनर् अनुगृहीते ऽतो ऽपूर्वार्थः । गावश् च ब्राह्मणे संस्था यज्ञकर्मशेषा आरम्भसामर्थ्याद् अस्य विज्ञायन्ते । एवं च सति यागशीलाद् ब्राह्मणाद् गाम् अपहरतः तदपहर्तुर् अर्धपादनं **सद्य** ऽनवेक्ष्य कालकार्यादीन् दण्डविकल्पहेतून् पूर्वश्लोकोतान् अस्य स्याद् इति । अन्यथा "महापशूनां हरणे" इत्य् अनेनैव सिद्धत्वाद् "गोषु ब्राह्मणसंस्थासु" इत्य् एतद् अनारम्भसमं प्रसज्येत । कालाद्यनपक्षायां सत्याम् आरब्धव्यम् इदम् । अतो विशेषार्थ एवम् अस्यारम्भो, न पुनरुक्तत्वादियुक्त इति । अथ तु यथा व्याख्यातः पूर्वश्लोकोपेक्ष्य राजतन्त्रविषय एव । अतो ऽस्यापूर्वकल्पनायाम् अयम् अदोष एव । **स्थूरिकायाश् च भेदन** एष एव दण्डः स्याद् आत्मीयाया अपि कृत् एतत् आरम्भसामर्थात् । स्थूरिका वन्ध्या गौर् देशान्तरे ऽभिधीयते । तां च लाङ्गलादिषु वाहयन्तो ऽवश्यं प्रतोदेन भिनन्ति । एवं च सति तद्भेदनं वाहोपलक्षणं तस्या विज्ञेयम् । यः पुनर् एतद् अन्यथा पठति **स्थूरिकायाश् च वाहन** इति, तस्य साक्षाद् अभिधानात् अनुमानगतिर् नास्ति । अन्यस् त्व् आह, पार्ष्ण्याश् चतुरङ्गुलाद् ऊर्ध्वः प्रदेशः **स्थूरिका**, तद्भेदने छेदने वा निदर्शनार्थत्वाद् भेदनग्रहणस्यैष एव दण्डः स्यात् । **पशूनां हरणे** चैव यथोक्तो दण्डः । अयं च्(ह्?)आगोपश्वर्थ आरम्भः । ब्राह्मणपशूनाम् एव यज्ञीयानां छागप्रभृतीनाम् अपहरणे बहूनां च । अन्यस् त्व् आह- अकर्मिणो ब्राह्मणस्य गवाम् एव बह्वीनाम्, अर्थाच् च क्षत्रियवैश्ययोः कर्मशीलयोः । कर्मशेषगवाम् उपसंग्रहणार्थम् इदं पुनः पशुग्रहणम् । ये पुनर् व्याख्यायन्ति "गोषु ब्राह्मणसंस्थासु" यद् दधि क्षीरं वा तदपहरणदण्डः, तत् प्रकरणाभावाद् [असंगतम् ॥ ८.३२४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

325	For (stealing) cows belonging to Brahmanas, piercing (the nostrils of) a barren cow, and for stealing (other) cattle (belonging to Brahmanas, the offender) shall forthwith lose half his feet.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/326_sUtra-kArpAsa-kiNvAnA~N_gomayasya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>326 सूत्र-कार्पास-किण्वानाङ् गोमयस्य ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सूत्र-कार्पास-किण्वानां  
गोमयस्य गुडस्य च ।  
दध्नः क्षीरस्य तक्रस्य  
पानीयस्य तृणस्य च  ॥ ८.३२६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/326_sUtra-kArpAsa-kiNvAnA~N_gomayasya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

326	(For stealing) thread, cotton, drugs causing fermentation, cowdung, molasses, sour milk, sweet milk, butter-milk, water, or grass,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/327_veNuvaidalabhANDAnAM_lavaNAnAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>327 वेणुवैदलभाण्डानां लवणानाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वेणुवैदलभाण्डानां  
लवणानां तथैव च ।  
मृण्मयानां च हरणे  
मृदो भस्मन एव च  ॥ ८.३२७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/327_veNuvaidalabhANDAnAM_lavaNAnAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

327	Vessels made of bamboo or other cane, salt of various kinds, earthen (vessels), earth and ashes,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/328_matsyAnAm_paxiNAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>328 मत्स्यानाम् पक्षिणाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

मत्स्यानां पक्षिणां चैव  
तैलस्य च घृतस्य च ।  
मांसस्य मधुनश् चैव  
यच् चाऽन्यत् पशु-संभवम्  ॥ ८.३२८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/328_matsyAnAm_paxiNAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

328	Fish, birds, oil, clarified butter, meat, honey, and other things that come from beasts,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/329_anyeShA~n_chaivam-AdInAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>329 अन्येषाञ् चैवम्-आदीनाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अन्येषां चैवम्-आदीनां  
मद्यानाम् ओदनस्य च [मेधातिथिपाठः - चैवमादीनाम् अद्यानाम्] ।  
पक्वान्नानां च सर्वेषां  
तन्मुल्याद् द्विगुणो दमः  ॥ ८.३२९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/329_anyeShA~n_chaivam-AdInAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of the theft of yarns, cotton, fermenting drug, cowdung, molasses, curds, milk, skimmed curd, water and grass (326),—of vessels made of bamboo or cane, as also of salts, earthenware, earth and ashes (327)—of fish, birds, oil, clarified butter, meat, honey, and other animal-products (328)—of other things of this kind, spirituous liquors, cooked rice and all kinds of cooked food,—the fine shall be double the value of the thing (stolen).—(326-329)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सूत्रम्** ऊर्णासणादि । **लवणानि** सैन्धवबिडलवणादीनि । **यच् चान्यत् पशुसंभवम्** आमिषादि[^८६] । **अन्येषाम्** अपूपमोदकादीनाम् । **आदि**शब्दः प्रकारे । प्रकारः सादृश्यं तुल्यता सदृशकार्यकरणोपयोगादिरूपा । तथा च सर्पिर्मण्डेक्षुखण्डशर्कराकिलाटकूर्चिकाद्या अपूपा गृह्यन्ते । **पशुसंभवं** राङ्कवाजिनाद्य् अपीच्छन्ति <u>केचित्</u> । **आदि**ग्रहणात् प्रकृतिर् विकृतिर् अपि ।[^८७] यच् चोभयोपादानं दध्नः क्षीरस्य चेति तद् उदाहरणार्थम् । एवं **सूत्र**ग्रहणेन सूत्रमयं वासो ऽपि गृह्यते । नलिकादीनां सत्य् अपि सूत्रमयत्वे पशुसंभवत्व उत्तमत्वाद् उत्तमानां चेत्य् अस्यापवादविषयः[^८८] । प्रकृत्यन्तरे तैलशब्दः स्नेहवाची, न तिलविकार एव । तेनातसीप्रियङ्गुपञ्चाङ्गुलतैलादयो ऽपि गृह्यन्ते ॥ ८.३२६–२९ ॥


[^८८]:
M G DK: ayam apavādaviṣayaḥ


[^८७]:
M G add: prakṛtiṃ


[^८६]:
M G: āmiṣāditi
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 8.326-329)  
**

‘*Yarns*’—woolen, jute and so forth.

‘*Salts*,’—rock-salt, black salt, and so forth.

‘*Other animal-products*’—the flesh, etc.

Other kinds of ‘*cooked food*’—such as sweet bread, sweetmeats, etc. The
term ‘*ādi*’ means *kinds*, kinship consisting in *similarity*,
*equality*, *similar utility*. It is in this sense that butter, gruel,
sugar-candy, sugar, coagulated milk, inspissated milk and so forth
become included. The term ‘*animal-products*.’ according to some,
includes the wool, the skin and so forth.

‘*And be forth*’—includes the products of the things mentioned; and as
an example of this, the text has mentioned both ‘curd’ and ‘milk.’

Similarly ‘*yarn*’ includes also cloth made from yarns.

As for the ‘*nalikā*’ and such things, even though they are made up of
yarns, and are ‘animal-products,’—yet, being already included under
‘fine clothes’ (verse 321), they are to be excluded from the present
verse.

The term ‘*taila*’ here stands for *oils* in general,—and not for the
*oil of* ‘*tila*,’ *sesamum*, only, as its derivation suggests. So that
the oils of *linseed*, *Priyaṅgu*, *cardamom* and other things also
become included.—(326-329)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 8.326-329)  
**

These verses are quoted in *Vīvādaratnākara* (p. 326), which adds the
following notes:—*Anyeṣāmevamādīnām*’, *i.e*., pastries and the
like,—‘*anyat paśusambhavām*’, skins, tusks and so forth;—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 989);—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 140),
which says that this refers to the case of the theft of small quantities
of yarn; and such as have been made ready for use.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.326-331)**

*Viṣṇu* (5.83-86).—‘A stealer of thread, cotton, cow-dung, sugar, sour
milk, milk, butter-milk, grass, salt, clay, ashes, birds, fish,
clarified butter, oil, meat, honey, basket-work, split bamboo,
earthenware, or iron pots, shall pay three times its value as fine;—the
same fine is ordained for dressed food. For stealing flowers, green
grain, shrubs, creepers, climbing plants or leaves, the fine is 5
*kṛṣṇalas*;—the same for stealing pot herbs, roots or fruits.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 22-24).—‘For stealing wood, cane, grass and the like,
earthenware-utensils, bamboo, utensils made of bamboos, rattan, bone,
leather, vegetables, green roots, grass, flowers, cow-milk, molasses,
salt, oil, cooked food, dressed food spirituous liquor, flesh, and other
objects of small value, a fine five times the value of the article shall
be levied.’

*Bṛahspati* (22.20).—‘When a man takes grass, wood, flowers, or fruit,
without permission of the owner, he deserves to have a hand cut off.’

Do. (22.25).—‘He who destroys or takes away implements of husbandry, an
embankment or flowers, roots or fruits, shall be fined a hundred *paṇas,
or* more according to the nature of the offence.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.275).—‘For stealing articles trifling, mediocre or
large, the punishment shall he in accordance with the value of the
article stolen; and in the inflicting of punishments, the King shall
take into consideration the time, the place and also the age and
capacity of the offender.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Aparārka, p. 848).—‘If a non-Brāhmaṇa steals, either
forcibly or unintentionally, any of the following articles belonging to
a Brāhmaṇa, he shall have his hand cutoff:—sacrificial fuel, clarified
butter, fire-wood, grass, fodder, flower, incense, fruits; if any one is
actually caught in the act of stealing kuśa-grass, leather-vessels, or
the Agnihotra-implements, his limb shall be cut off; hut if he is found
out afterwards, he shall be made to ride a donkey if he is a Brāhmaṇa,
and shall have his head shaven.’

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 325).—‘One who steals trifling and mediocre
articles, or flowers, roots or fruits, shall be made to pay double the
value of the article, or a fine of five *kṛṣṇalas*.’

Do. (p. 328).—‘For stealing things of small value or milk or
milk-products, the stealer should ho made to pay to the owner the value
of the thing, and to the King a fine double the said value.’

*Gautama* (Do.).—‘Five *kṛṣṇalas* for the stealing of fruits, green
grains or vegetables.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 327).—‘For the stealing of dressed wood,
stone, earthenware, vessels made of leather or cane, the fine shall be
either five times the value of the article stolen, or three
*kārṣāpaṇas*.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 100).—‘For stealing flowers, fruits, vegetables,
roots, cooked food, vessels of leather, bamboo or earthenware, or other
trifling things, the fine shall be not less than 12, or more than 24
*Paṇas*. For stealing articles made of iron, wood or ropes,—or of small
animals, clothes and such things, or large objects, the fine shall be
not less than 24, or more than 40 *Paṇas*; for stealing vessels made of
copper, *vṛtta* (?), bell-metal, glass or ivory, the fine shall be not
less than 48 or more than 90 *Paṇas*, *i.e*., the first amercement.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अथोक्तानां द्रव्याणां मूल्याद् द्विगुणो दमश् चतुर्भिः श्लोकैर् उच्यते । सूत्रादिश्लोकगणे चात्र यद् भस्मनो मृदश् च ग्रहणं तत्सर्वप्रदर्शनार्थं विज्ञयते । तथा च निगमयति "अन्येषां चैवमादीनाम्" इति ॥ ८.३२५–२८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

329	Or other things of a similar kind, spirituous liquor, boiled rice, and every kind of cooked food, the fine (shall be) twice the value (of the stolen article).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/330_puShpeShu_harite.md">
<details open><summary><h3>330 पुष्पेषु हरिते ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पुष्पेषु हरिते धान्ये  
गुल्म-वल्ली-नगेषु च ।  
अन्येष्व् अपरिपूतेषु  
दण्डः स्यात् पञ्चकृष्णलः  ॥ ८.३३० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/330_puShpeShu_harite.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For flowers, green corns, shrubs, creepers, trees and other unhusked (grains), the fine shall consist of five ‘kṛṣṇalas.’—(330)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

नवमालिकादीनि **पुष्पाणि** । **हरितं**[^८९] **धान्यं** क्षेत्रस्थम् अपक्वम् । **नगा** वृक्षाः । **अन्येष्व् अपरिपूतेषु** । बहुवचनात् परिपवनस्य च धान्येष्व् एव[^९०] तुषपलालादिविमोक्षरूपयस्य[^९१] संभवाद् उत्तरश्लोके धान्यग्रहणम् एवाकृष्यते । **गुल्मादीनां** हि सत्य् अपि पलाशे[^९२] व्यमिश्रत्वे पुष्पाणां च, न[^९३] परिपूतव्यवहारः । स्पतमी हरणापेक्षा । 


[^९३]:
     M G J omit: na


[^९२]:
     DK: palāśa-


[^९१]:
     M G: -rūpayoḥ


[^९०]:
     M G: paripavanāya ca dhānyaṃ kṣetreṣv eva


[^८९]:
     M G: haranti

तत् तु[^९४] पूर्वस्माद् अनुवर्तते । अत्र **पञ्चकृष्णलो दण्डः** । कृष्णला नानाद्रव्यजाः[^९५] । अल्पत्वमहत्त्वप्रयोजनापेक्षाः । सुवर्णस्येति <u>पूर्वे</u> ॥ ८.३३० ॥


[^९५]:
     M G DK: kṛṣṇalānāṃ dravyajātiḥ


[^९४]:
     M G: tattvaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Flowers*’—The *navamallikā* and the rest.

‘*Green com*’—while still in the field.

‘*Other unhusked*,’—‘*anyesu aparipūteṣu*’;—in as much as this has the
plural form, and ‘*husking*,’—which consists in the removing of chaff
and husks—is possible only in the case of ‘*grains*,’ we construe this
along with the term ‘*dhānyesu*,’ ‘grains,’ of the next verse. As for
‘*shrubs, creepers and trees*’ and (‘*flowers*’ which are expressed by
the only other words in the verse with the plural ending), though the
former have leaves, and the latter also are generally mixed up with
leaves, yet they are never spoken of as ‘*husked*.’

The Locative ending refers to the ‘*stealing*,’ mentioned in the
preceding verse, from where it is construed here also.

In the case of these, there shall be a fine of ‘*five kṛṣṇalas*’;—the
‘*kṛṣṇalas*’ meant being of various metals, to be determined in
accordance with the greater or less utility of the things stolen. The
ancients have held that it refers to *gold* only.—(330)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Anyeṣu*’—Medhātithi does not read ‘*alpeṣu*’ as asserted by Hopkins.

‘*Pañcakṛṣṇalaḥ*’—‘Medhātithi says that the *kṛṣṇalas* meant may be gold
or silver, in accordance with the gravity of the offence’—that ‘it is
meant to be *gold* only’ is the view that he quotes as held by the
‘ancients.’ Buhler therefore is not right in attributing this latter
view to Medhātithi himself.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 325) which adds the
following notes:—‘*Harite dhānye*’, which is still lying unripe in the
field; on this being stolen for purposes of fodder ,—‘ *naga*’,
tree,—‘*alpeṣu*’ (which is its reading for ‘*anyeṣu*’), quantity even
less than what can be carried by a man,—‘*aparipūteṣu*’,
unhusked,—‘*dhānye*’, in construing the sentence the number is to be
changed into the plural, ‘*dhānyeṣu*.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.326-331)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.326-329].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

[हरित इत्य्] अपक्वं च धान्यानां राश्यपेक्षम् ॥ ८.३२९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

330	For flowers, green corn, shrubs, creepers, trees, and other unhusked (grain) the fine (shall be) five krishnalas.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/331_paripUteShu_dhAnyeShu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>331 परिपूतेषु धान्येषु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

परिपूतेषु धान्येषु  
शाक-मूल-फलेषु च ।  
निरन्वये शतं दण्डः  
सान्वये ऽर्धशतं दमः  ॥ ८.३३१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/331_paripUteShu_dhAnyeShu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For husked grains, for vegetables, roots and fruits, there shall be a fine of a hundred, in a case where there has been no propitiation; and fifty, where there has been propitiation.—(331)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**मूलम्** इक्षुद्राक्षादि । **निरन्वये** द्रव्यहरणे । अन्वयो ऽनुनयः, स्वामिनः प्रीत्यादिप्रयोगः- "यत् त्वदीयं तन् मदीयम् एवेत्य् अनया बुद्ध्याहं प्रवृत्तः, न चेद् एवं तद् गृहाण" इत्येवमादिवचनं तद् यत्र न क्रियते तन् **निरन्वयम्** । साहसप्रकारत्वाद् अधिको दण्डः । अन्वयेन सह **सान्वयः** । 

अथ वा **निरन्वयो**[^९६] येन सह कश्चिद् अपि संबन्धो नास्त्य् एकग्रामवासादिः । ततः शतं दण्ड्यः । अथ वा अनारक्षम् **निरन्वयम्** । सति तु रक्षके[^९७] उभयापराधाद् अल्पो दण्डः । खलस्थेषु धान्येष्व् अयं दण्डः । तत्र हि परिपूयन्ते । गृहस्थेषु त्व् एकादशगुणः प्राग् उक्तः (च्ड़्। म्ध् ८.३२०) ॥ ८.३३१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Roots, etc*.,’—*e.g*., sugar-cane, grapes and so forth.

In a case of theft which is ‘*niranvaya*’;—‘*anvaya*’ stands for
‘*propitiation*,’ the adopting of a conciliatory attitude towards the
owner, such as—‘I took this thing under the impression that what is
yours is mine also; if this be not so, then take it,’—or some such
words;—where this is not done, it is a ‘*case where there has been no
propitiation*’; and this being a form of ‘robbery,’ the punishment is
severe.

A case where there has been such ‘propitiation’ is called ‘*sānvaya*.’

Or, the meaning may be that there shall be a fine of ‘hundred’ in a case
where there is no ‘*relationship*’ between the parties,—such as living
in the same village and so forth.

Or, ‘*niranvaya*’ may mean ‘*unguarded*.’ Where the watchman is present,
since the fault lies with both (thief as well as the watchman), the
punishment of the thief shall be slight.

The punishment here laid down refers to the case of stealing corns lying
in the threshing yard, where they are husked. In the case of corns
stored in the house, the fine shall be ‘eleven times their value,’ as
declared above (330).—(331)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Niranvaye*’—‘(*a*) Friendly leading, or, (*b*) neighbourliness, or
(*c*) absence of watchman’ (Medhātithi);—Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa have
(*a*);—and Kullūka and Rāghavānanda have (*b*).—See 198 above.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 324), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Paripūteṣu*,’ husked,—‘*niranvaye*,’ (the
appropriating being done) without any such justification as friendship
and the like; in view of the present rule being inconsistent with what
Manu has himself said in regard to ‘*vadha*’ being the penalty for
stealing more than 10 *kumbhas* of grains, and ‘eleven times’ the fine
for stealing lesser quantities,—people have held that the present rule
is meant for thefts from the harvesting yard, the heavier penalties
being for thefts from the houses.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.326-331)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.326-329].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**निरन्वये** आरक्षानधिष्ठिते ग्रहणम् अयुक्ततरम् इति शतं दण्ड उच्यते, **सान्वये** तूभयत्र दोषात् साहसत्वाद् वार्धम् उच्यते । अन्यस् त्व् आह- **निरन्वये** निरनुगमे यदि नानुनयति ततो हरणं शतदण्ड्यो भवति । अथानुगमयति ततः पञ्चाशत् ॥ ८.३३० ॥

_अन्ये त्व् आहुः ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

331	For husked grain, vegetables, roots, and fruit the fine (shall be) one hundred (panas) if there is no connexion (between the owner and the thief), fifty (panas) if such a connexion exists.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/332_syAt_sAhasam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>332 स्यात् साहसम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

स्यात् साहसं त्व् अन्वयवत्  
प्रसभं कर्म यत् कृतम् ।  
निरन्वयं भवेत् स्तेयं  
हृत्वापव्ययते च यत्  ॥ ८.३३२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/332_syAt_sAhasam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the act is committed with violence and in the presence of men, it is ‘robbery’; it is ‘theft’ when done in the absence of men, and when it is denied after having been done.—(332)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

परद्रव्यापहरणं **स्तेयम्** उच्यते । धात्वर्थप्रसिद्ध्या चास्यैव कर्ता स्तेनः ।[^९८] इह तु विशेषेणायं व्यवहार इष्यते तदर्थो ऽयं श्लोकः । न परद्रव्यादानमात्रं स्तेयम्, ऋणादाननिक्षेपादिष्व् अपि स्तेयदण्डप्रसङ्गात् । संज्ञाभेदो दण्डभेदार्थः ।[^९९] 


[^९९]:
     M G add: apahnutya yat tena mayā kṛtam ity āha


[^९८]:
     M G DK (1:1691) add: tasya kartavyena

**कर्म यत् कृतं** परपीडाकरं वस्त्रोत्पाटनाग्निदाहद्रव्यापहर्णादि[^१००] । अग्निदाहे यद्य् अपि द्रव्यापहरणं नास्ति तथापि चौर्यम् एव रहसि करणाद् अपह्नवाच् च मन्यन्ते । चौर्ये हि द्रव्यविशेषाश्रयो दण्डः । सो ऽत्र न स्यात् । एवमर्थम् एव स्तेयप्रकरणोत्कर्षणम्[^१०१] ।[^१०२] **प्रसभं कर्म** इति कर्मग्रहणाद् द्रव्यापहाराद् अन्यद् अप्य् एवंकृतम् अयुक्तं साहसम् एव । कस् तर्ह्य् अग्निदाहादाव् अप्रसभं कृते दण्डः । कण्टकशुद्धौ वक्ष्यामः । अत एव संधिछेदे[^१०३] ऽसत्य् अपि द्रव्यापहरणे कण्टकशुद्धौ दण्डम् आमनन्ति । अन्यथा स्तेय एवावक्ष्यत्[^१०४] ॥ ८.३३२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The taking away of what belongs to another is called ‘theft’; and on
account of the denotation, of the root from which the word is derived,
one who commits ‘theft’ is a ‘thief.’ But for cases of a particular kind
of theft, special provisions have been made; that is why we have the
present texts. In fact merely ‘taking what belongs to another’ cannot be
‘theft,’ because if it were, then in cases of debts and deposits also,
punishments for ‘theft’ would have to be inflicted. The present texts
have used a different name (‘*sāhasa*,’ ‘robbery,’ in place of
‘*steya*,’ ‘theft’) with a view to laying down different forms of
punishment.

‘*Is denied*,’—*i.e*., having done the act, the man says ‘I have not
done it.’

‘*The act is committed*’—such as causes pain to others, *e.g*., tearing
clothes, setting (ire, taking away property and so forth. In the case of
‘setting fire,’ though there is no ‘taking away of property,’ yet it is
regarded as ‘theft,’ because it is done secretly, and denied afterwards.
But in cases of ‘theft,’ the punishment is determined by the nature of
the article stolen; this would, therefore, not be applicable to the case
of ‘setting fire.’ It is for this reason that the present section has
been separated from that on ‘Theft.’

‘*Act done with violence*’;—since the text mentions ‘act’ in general,
acts other than ‘the taking away of other’s property’ also, when clone
with violence, would come under ‘robbery.’

“What punishment could there be in the case of the setting of fire, and
such acts, when clone *without violence*?”

This we shall explain under the section on ‘Extirpation of Criminals.’

It is for this reason that, in a case where a house has been broken
into, but nothing stolen, they declare the punishment to be what is laid
down under ‘Extirpation of Criminals.’ Otherwise, this should have come
under ‘*Theft*’ itself.—(332)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Ata eva sandhicchede* & c.’ (Medhātithi, p. 1069, l. 10)—See Manu
9.276.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 298), which
adds the following explanatory notes:—When the misappropriation of
other’s property is done openly by force, even in the presence of
watchmen and the king’s officers, then it is ‘*Sāhasa*’,
*robbery*,—‘theft’ consists in misappropriating secretly during absence,
or by fraud;—and when the man, after avoiding the king’s officers and
taking away the property, subsequently through fear, hides it, then also
it is a case of ‘theft.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 286), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Anvayavat*’ in the presence of the men guarding
it,—‘*prasabham*,’ by force;—*i.e*., it is ‘robbery’ when the
misappropriation is done without any attempt at
concealment;—‘*apavyayate*’ hides, denies;—wherever there is
misappropriation, it is ‘theft,’ which is of two kinds—(1) done in the
absence of watchmen, and (2) done even in the presence of the watchman,
but afterwards hidden.

The same work quotes it again on p. 350 where it adds the following
explanation:—When the property is taken away in the presence of the
watchman, this is what is called ‘*sānvaya apahāra*,’ which is
*robbery*, but where it is taken away in the absence of the watchman,
and then denied, it is *theft*.

It is quoted in ‘*Mitākṣārā*,’ (2.266), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Anvayavat*,’ in the presence of the guardians of the property,
the state officials and others,—‘*prasabham*,’ by force—where another’s
property is taken away—it is called ‘robbery different from this is
‘theft,’ which is ‘*niranvaya*’—*i.e*., done either in the absence of
the guardians of property and others, or through fraud;—and whenever the
act, though committed in the presence of these persons, is concealed
through fear, this also is ‘theft’ *Bālambhaṭṭī* has declared
‘*kṛtvāpavyayate ca yat*’ to be the generally accepted reading, and
explains it as ‘conceals.’

It is quoted in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 329), which explains ‘*anvayavat*’
as ‘before the owner’s eyes,’ and ‘*niranvayam*’ as ‘behind the owner’s
back’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 150b), which adds the same
explanation and adds that even in cases of robbery, if the accused
denies the act in the court, it becomes a case of ‘theft.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.230).—‘The forcible taking away of what does not belong
exclusively to one has been called *Robbery*. The penalty in this case
consists of a fine double the value of the article; if the robbery is
denied, it shall he four times that value.’

*Bṛhaspati* (28.2 *et* *seq*.).—‘Stealers are of two kinds—open
(robbers) and secret (thieves); fraudulent traders, quacks, gamblers,
dishonest judges, bribe-takers, cheats, persons pretending to interpret
omens, or to practise propitiatory rites, low artists, forgers, hired
servants refusing to work, dishonest umpires, perjured witnesses and
jugglers—these are *open* stealers.’

*Bṛhaspati* (22.24).—‘Robbery is declared to be threefold as it may be
of the lowest, middling or highest kind; the punishment in each case
should also be of the lowest, middling or highest sort, according to the
nature of the article.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 1 *et seq*.).—‘Two kinds of robbers stealing the goods
of others have to he distinguished—the one kind, open and the other kind
concealed. Open robbers are those who forge measures and weights,
receivers of bribes, robbers, gamblers, public prostitutes, those who go
about in disguise, etc., etc.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 100).—‘The taking away of an article, if accompanied
by force, is called *Robbery*,— if not accompanied by force,
*Theft*,—also when the act is denied.

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 287).—‘When a thing is taken away
forcibly, in the presence of watchmen, it is *sāhasa*, Robbery; if it is
done secretly, it is *steya*, Theft.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यत् सारक्षं **प्रसभम्** अविसङ्कितेन क्रियते तत् साहसम् । **निरन्वयं** तु यद् अनधिष्ठितम् आरक्षे तन् न स्तेयम् । यच् च **सान्वयम्** अपि कृत्वापव्ययते तद् अपि स्तेयम् एव ॥ ८.३३१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

332	An offence (of this description), which is committed in the presence (of the owner) and with violence, will be robbery; if (it is committed) in his absence, it will be theft; likewise if (the possession of) anything is denied after it has been taken.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/333_yas_tv.md">
<details open><summary><h3>333 यस् त्व् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यस् त्व् एतान्य् उपकॢप्तानि  
द्रव्याणि स्तेनयेन् नरः ।  
तम् आद्यं दण्डयेद् राजा  
यश् चाग्निं चोरयेद् गृहात् [मेधातिथिपाठः - तं शतं]  ॥ ८.३३३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/333_yas_tv.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a man steals these things when they have been prepared, the king should fine him one hundred; as also him who steals the fire from the house.—(333)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**एतानि** सूत्रादीनि, **उपकॢप्तानि** प्रत्यासन्नदानोपभोगादिकार्यकालानि, अथ वा संस्कृतानि कृतसामर्थ्याधानानि । यथा तद् एव सूत्रं तन्तुवायहस्ते वायनार्थं दत्तं किंचिद् द्विगुणीक्रियते किंचित् परिवर्त्यते, एवं दधि मन्थनमरिचशर्करादिसंस्कृतम्, क्षीरं घृतम् इत्यादिसंस्कारः । तत्र **शतं** दण्डः । "आद्यम्" इति पाठे प्रथमसाहसः । **अग्निगृहात्** परिगृहीतं शालाग्निहोत्रेत्याद्यर्थम्,[^१०५] हेमन्ते वा सीतार्दितानां दरिद्राणाम् अप्रणीतम् अप्य् अग्नेर् उपकल्पनं पाककाले[^१०६] शीतादिनिवृत्त्यर्थं वा तापनकाले[^१०७] । अविशेषेणायम् अग्नेर् दण्डः स्वल्पस्य बहोर् उपकॢप्तस्यानुपकॢप्तस्य च । 


[^१०७]:
     M G J: tāpanakālaḥ


[^१०६]:
     M G J: pākakālaḥ


[^१०५]:
     M G J: -ādikaṃ

सत्य् अपि सूत्रादिदण्डे (म्ध् ८.३२६) आदिग्रहणे (म्ध् ८.३२९) नाग्नेस् तन्मूल्यादि संभवति,[^१०८] क्रयविक्रयव्यवहाराप्रसिद्धेः । यावता वेन्धनेनाग्निर् उपहृतपरिमाण[^१०९] उत्पद्यते यावतीभिर् दक्षिणाभिस् तन्मूल्याद् द्विगुणो दण्डः संभवति, शक्यते च[^११०] व्यपदेष्टुम्, तुष्ट्युत्पत्तिश् च स्वामिनः स्थितैव । अतस् त्रेताग्निहरणे यावत् पुनर् आधाने गच्छति प्रायश्चित्तेष्टौ च तावद् अग्निमते दातव्यः[^१११] । अतो ऽयम् अग्नेर् दण्डः शालाप्रणीताग्निविषय एव स्वल्पत्वात् । त्रेतायां तु तन्मूल्याद् द्विगुण इति । तथा च सुलभेष्व् अधिकारनिवृत्तिम् अकुर्वत्सु यागाङ्गद्रव्येष्व् अपह्रियमाणेषु[^११२] "कुशकरकाग्निहोत्रद्रव्यान्य्[^११३] अपहरतो ऽङ्गच्छेदः स्यात्" इति शङ्खः । अग्निषु तु हृतेष्व् अधिकार एव निवर्तते । तत्र कथं महान् दण्डो न स्यात् ॥ ८.३३३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*These things*’—yarns and the rest.

‘*Prepared*:’—when the time for their being put to use,—in the form of
being given away or enjoyed—is near at hand. Or it may mean ‘*refined*,’
*i.e*., ‘having fresh capacity produced in them.’ For instance, after
the yarn is at first handed over to the weaver for being woven into
cloth, it is doubled up, then turned up and so forth; the curd becomes
‘refined’ by having pepper, sugar and other things mixed with it;
similarly milk, clarified butter and so forth.

In these eases the fine shall be ‘one hundred.’

If the reading is ‘? *dyam*’ in place of ‘*śatam*,’ then the fine shall
consist of the ‘first amercement.’

‘*Fire from the home*’—the fire kindled for the purpose of cooking
meals; or the fire kindled in connection with the *Agnihotra* offerings;
or the fire that is set up, without consecration, for the convenience of
the cold-stricken poor. The same punishment applies to the case of all
kinds of fire,—kindled at the time of cooking, or for relieving the cold
of the poor, or for making sacrificial offerings,—be the quantity of
fire stolen large or small.

Though under verse 326 where punishment for the stealing of ‘yarns’ and
other things is laid down, we have the phrase ‘and other things’ (which
might include Fire also), yet there can be no determination of its
‘value,’ since there is no buying or selling of it (so that ‘double the
value’ could not be determined). Though it would he possible to fix the
fine at a sum which would be the double of that which would enable a
sufficient quantity of fire to be kindled, or which would constitute the
‘sacrificial fee’ necessary for the rekindling of the fire.

In addition to this fine, the necessity of satisfying the owner remains
(as laid down under 288 above).

Thus then, in the case of the stealing of the sacrificial fire-triad,
the thief shall pay to the owner of the fire the amount that would be
needed for the re-kindling rites and for the expiatory rites necessary
under the circumstances.

For these reasons the punishment prescribed in the present verse must be
taken as referring to the fire kindled for household purposes; since
that would be of small consequence. In the case of the sacrificial fire,
the fine must be ‘double the value’ (as laid down in 329). Similarly in
the case of the theft of such minor sacrificial accessories as kuśa,
pebbles and such other things,—whose absence does not disqualify the
sacrificer,—there should be cutting off of the limb,—says Śaṅkha. When
however the fires themselves are stolen, the man becomes entirely
incapacitated; why then should not the punishment in this case be most
heavy?—(333)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Upakḷptāni*’—(*a*) ‘Ready for being put to use, in the way of gift,
enjoyment and so forth, or (*b*) specially prepared or embellished’
(Medhātithi);—‘Ready for use’ (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda). No commentator
explains the term as ‘thread worked into cloth’; Buhler has no
justification for attributing it to ‘Medh., Gov., Kull., and Rāgh.’

‘*Agni*’—‘Consecrated fire’ (Medhātithi and Kullūka);—also the ordinary
fire (Govindarāja).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 140), which says the
‘fire’ meant is that which has been consecrated by either *Śrauta* or
*Smārta* rites.
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

य एतानि सूत्रादीनि यथोक्तान्य् उपकॢप्तानि यथाकथंचिद् अवगुप्तान्य् अपि प्रसभं स्तेनयेत् तं राजा प्रसङ्गनिवृत्त्यर्थम् अल्पे महति वा शतम् अविशेषेण दण्डयेत् । अग्नेश् चादरार्थं पृथग्ग्रहणम् । अपि च सूत्रादौ गणे मूल्याद् द्विगुणो दम उच्यते । न चाग्नेः क्रयविक्रय्[औ, अथः तं शतं दण्ड्]अयेद् राजा यश् चाग्निं चोरयेद् गृहात् । भोगायोपकॢप्तानि- एतानि यथासंभवं भोगाभिमुखेषु यो ऽपहरेत् तस्याद्यो दण्डः, यश् च परिगृहीतो ऽग्निः तम् एव वा दौःशील्याद् उपहरेत् । साधनं वा स्रुक्स्रुवोलूखलमुसलाद्य् अग्न्यर्थत्वाद् अग्निशब्देनोच्यते गुणतः ॥ ८.३३२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

333	On that man who may steal (any of) the above-mentioned articles, when they are prepared for (use), let the king inflict the first (or lowest) amercement; likewise on him who may steal (a sacred) fire out of the room (in which it is kept).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/334_yena_yena.md">
<details open><summary><h3>334 येन येन ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

येन येन यथाङ्गेन  
स्तेनो नृषु विचेष्टते ।  
तत् तद् एव हरेत् तस्य  
प्रत्यादेशाय पार्थिवः  ॥ ८.३३४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/334_yena_yena.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

By whatever limb the thief operates against men, that shall the king take off, by way of retribution.—(334)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

भूयोभूयः प्रवृत्तस्यायं दण्डः । यो धनेन दण्डितो ऽपि न मार्गे ऽवतिष्ठते तस्य त्रिचतुर्दण्डितस्यानवतिष्ठमानस्य द्रव्यजातिपरिमाणानपेक्षः संधिच्छेदाद्यनपेक्षचौर्यक्रियामात्राश्रितो[^११४] ऽङ्गच्छेदः । यस्य यस्याङ्गस्य बलम् आश्रित्यावतिष्ठते स्तेनश् चौर्ये प्रवर्तते **तत् तद् अस्य हरेच्** छिन्द्यात् । यस्य कश्चित् पादवलम् आश्रित्यावष्टभ्य पलायते "न माम् अनुगन्तुं कश्चिद् अपि शक्नोति" इति तस्य पादच्छेदः ।[^११५] अन्यः "संधिभेदज्ञो ऽहम्" तस्य हस्तच्छेदः । **प्रत्यादेशाय** प्रतिरूपफलदर्शनाय । स्वावष्टम्भेन साभिमानं सक्रोधं सावज्ञं न्यक्करणं वा **प्रत्यादेशः** । "य एवं करोति तस्य तस्याहम् एवं कर्ता" इति व्याख्यापनं प्रत्यादेशः ॥ ८.३३४ ॥


[^११५]:
     M G add: anyaḥ saṃdhibhedaḥ |


[^११४]:
     M G: sanvicchedādy-
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The punishment here laid down is meant for one who is repeatedly
addicted to stealing. If even on being found, the man does not remain in
the path of rectitude, then, after having been fined thrice or four
times, he should have his limb cut off,—irrespectively of the quality or
quantity of the article stolen, as also of any considerations regarding
his having broken through a wall or other details,—merely on the
strength of his having committed the act of stealing.

When the thief acts,—*i.e*., steals through the strength of any
particular limb,—that limb the king should ‘*take off*’—*i.e*., cut off.
For instance, if the thief depending upon his fleet foot, runs off,
under the impression that no one can overtake him,—then his feet should
be cut off. When another relies upon his knowledge of the art of
breaking through walls, he should have his hands cut off.

‘*By way of retribution*’—with a view to make him receive a reward in
keeping with his act.

Or ‘*pratyādeśa*’ may stand for *reproach*, forcible, dignified, angry
and contemptuous; consisting in the king’s declaration ‘he who acts
thus, him shall I treat in this manner.’—(334)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Pratyādeśāya*’—‘By way of making a deterrent example’
(Medhātithi);—‘for the purpose of preventing repetition’ (Kullūka).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (Theft, 34).—‘With whatever limb a thief acts among men, that
very limb shall be taken away from him such is the law ordained by
Manu.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यस्याङ्गस्य हस्तस्य वा पादस्य वा बलम् आश्रित्य स्तेनः स्तेये प्रवर्तते तत् तद् एवास्य छेत्तव्यम् । तद् यथा । ग्रन्थिच्छेदको हस्तबलं हस्ताच्छेदकः पादबलम् । यश् च दण्डितो ऽपि पौनह् पुन्येन वर्तते अपरिगणय्य पूर्वदण्डं तस्यायम् अङ्गच्छेद् उच्यते । तद् उक्तम् "वधदण्डम् अतः परम्" इति । एवं च क्वचिच् छेदनविधानम् अर्थवद् भवति । यथा सति छेदने हस्तच्छेदनम् अस्य ॥ ८.३३३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

334	With whatever limb a thief in any way commits (an offence) against men, even of that (the king) shall deprive him in order to prevent (a repetition of the crime).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/335_pitAchAryaH_suhRn.md">
<details open><summary><h3>335 पिताचार्यः सुहृन् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पिताचार्यः सुहृन् माता  
भार्या पुत्रः पुरोहितः ।  
नाऽदण्ड्यो नाम राज्ञो ऽस्ति  
यः स्वधर्मे न तिष्ठति  ॥ ८.३३५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/335_pitAchAryaH_suhRn.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Neither the father or the preceptor or the friend or the mother or the wife or the son or the priest is unpunishable for the King, when they do not keep within their duty.—(335)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"भार्या पुत्रः स्वका तनुः" (म्ध् ४.१८४) आत्मीयं शरीरम् । कः पुनर् आत्मनो दण्डः । प्रायश्चित्ततपोधनदानादिविवक्षितम्[^११६] । विचलितो धर्मात् स्वकात् । यो यः स्वधर्मान् नानुतिष्ठति[^११७] स सर्वो दण्ड्यः[^११८] ॥ ८.३३५ ॥


[^११८]:
     M G: daṇḍaḥ


[^११७]:
     M G: dharmaḥ svakānyo yaḥ svadharmān na tu tiṣṭhati


[^११६]:
     M G DK (1: 578) omit: -vakṣitam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

“It has been asserted that ‘the wife and the sou form one’s own body’;
what would be the punishment inflicted upon one’s self?”

It would consist of expiatory rites, austerities and charities. Whoever
does not perform his duty, or deviates from his duty, should be
punished.—(335)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is qüoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 391);—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 291), which adds that the father and
mother must be exceptions to this rule, as is clear from the following
Smṛti-text quoted by *Vijñāneśvara*:—‘The following are
unpunishable—Father, Mother, Accomplished Student, Priest, Wandering
Mendicant, Anchorite, &c.’ Similarly the ‘very learned man’ should not
be punished.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 628).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata* (12.121.60).

*Yājñavalkya* (1.357).—‘Even a brother, a son, revered person,
father-in-law or maternal uncle,—none of these is unpunishable for the
King, if he has deviated from his path of duty.’

*Dakṣa* (Aparārka, p. 590).—‘If a man after having become a wandering
mendicant does not remain firm in his duty, he shall be banished after
having been branded with the sign of the dog’s foot.’

*Nārada* (7.17).—‘Should a man, after entering the order of religious
ascetics, violate the duties of his order, the King shall cause him to
be branded with a dog’s foot and banish him immediately from his realm.’

*Bṛhaspati* (27.7).—‘The King should punish elders, domestic priests,
and persons commanding respect, with gentle admonition only.’

*Smṛtyantara* (Aparārka, p. 590).—‘The mother and the father arc
unpunishable; as also the Accomplished Student, the Domestic Priest, the
Renunciate, the Ascetic, and people endowed with learning, character,
purity and good conduct.’

*Gautama* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 291).—‘He who is very highly
learned should not suffer corporal punishment, or imprisonment, or fine
or banishment or blame.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रकरणात् सुवर्णस्तेयदण्डो ऽयम् । यदि त्व् अन्यत्रापि कार्यसामान्यात् कुप्यते ततो ऽयं सर्वव्यतिक्रमेषु प्रकरणानुक्रमेण दण्डः पित्रादीनां विज्ञेयः । गुरुत्वात् परिपालनीयत्वं येनैषाम् अत्यन्तम् । अतो ऽदण्ड्याशङ्कानिवृत्त्यर्थम् एषाम् इदं दण्डवचनम् । अन्ये त्व् अर्थवादम् इमं स्तेयदण्डस्यान्यपुरुषविषयस्य कल्पयन्ति । तद् अयुक्तम्, उत्तरश्लोके राजदण्डविरोधात् ॥ ८.३३४ ॥

_तथा च दर्शयति ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

335	Neither a father, nor a teacher, nor a friend, nor a mother, nor a wife, nor a son, nor a domestic priest must be left unpunished by a king, if they do not keep within their duty.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/336_kArShApaNam_bhaved.md">
<details open><summary><h3>336 कार्षापणम् भवेद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

कार्षापणं भवेद् दण्ड्यो  
यत्राऽन्यः प्राकृतो जनः ।  
तत्र राजा भवेद् दण्ड्यः  
सहस्रम् इति धारणा  ॥ ८.३३६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/336_kArShApaNam_bhaved.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

When an ordinary man would be fined one ‘Kārṣāpaṇa,’ the king should be fined one thousand; such is the established rule.—(336)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**प्राकृतो जनः** सामान्यपुरुषो यो नातिगुणसंयुक्तः । तस्य **यत्र** यस्मिन्न् अपराधे यावान् दण्डस् तत्सहस्रगुणो राज्ञः, कार्षापणग्रहणस्य दण्डपरिमाणोपलक्षणार्थत्वात्,[^११९] दृष्टार्थत्वाद्[^१२०] दण्डस्य । तस्य[^१२१] चात्मानम् अनियम्य परो नियन्तुं न शक्यत इति युक्तं प्रत्यपराधे राज्ञो दण्डार्हत्वम् । महाधनत्वाद् अल्पं दण्डं न विगणयेत् । राजाधिकृतानां मन्त्रिपुरोहितादीनाम् अनयैव कल्पनया न्यूनाधिकभावः । धनदण्डश् च ब्राह्मणेभ्यो ऽप्सु प्रवेशनेन वरुणाय वा । यतो वक्ष्यति "राज्ञां दण्डधरो हि सः" (म्ध् ९.२४५) ॥ ८.३३६ ॥


[^१२१]:
     M G omit: tasya


[^१२०]:
     M G omit: dṛṣṭārthatvād


[^११९]:
     DK (4: 1973, not 1: 578): -ārthatvaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Ordinary man*’—a common person; who is not possessed of any special
qualifications;—for a certain crime the King shall he fined a thousand
times the fine that would be imposed upon an ordinary man;—the
‘*kārsāpaṇa*’ being mentioned only as a standard of fine.

Since punishment is meant to accomplish a visible purpose, it is only
right that the king should punish himself also for any crime that he
commits; as it is only by doing so that he can keep other men under
check, and, in as much as he is very wealthy, he would not mind a small
fine.

On the same principle the fine in the case of the king’s
officers,—ministers, priests and others,—shall vary.

The fine imposed upon himself should be either given away to Brāhmaṇas,
or thrown into water as an offering to Varuṇa; since it is going to be
declared that Varuṇa ‘holds the sceptre over kings’ (9.245).—(336)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 654), which adds that the
‘rājās’ meant here are the *subsidiary kings*.
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

राज्ञो ऽपि धर्मव्यतिक्रमम् आसेव्य यथोक्तात् सहस्रगुणो दण्डः वरुणायाप्सु प्रवेश्यो ऽयं ब्राह्मणेभ्यो वा विद्वद्भ्यः उपपाद्यः । अन्यस्यापि च दण्डहिरण्यस्याइताम् एव तद्द्वयीं प्रतिपत्तिं वक्ष्यति । य्क्तं च यन् महादण्डो राज्ञः स्याद् अल्पे ऽप्य् अपराधे येनासौ धर्मज्ञस् तद्व्यवस्थाहेतुश् च सन् धर्मव्यतिक्रमे वर्तते । तथा [सति ऽवि]दुषो ऽतिक्रमे दण्डभूयस्तम्" ज्यायसो ऽप्य् आहुः ॥ ८.३३५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

336	Where another common man would be fined one karshapana, the king shall be fined one thousand; that is the settled rule.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/337_aShTApAdyan_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>337 अष्टापाद्यन् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अष्टापाद्यं तु शूद्रस्य  
स्तेये भवति किल्बिषम् ।  
षोडशैव तु वैश्यस्य  
द्वात्रिंशत् क्षत्रियस्य च  ॥ ८.३३७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/337_aShTApAdyan_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

(अग्रे व्याख्यानम्।)
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

337	In (a case of) theft the guilt of a Sudra shall be eightfold, that of a Vaisya sixteenfold, that of a Kshatriya two-and-thirtyfold,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/338_brAhmaNasya_chatuHShaShTiH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>338 ब्राह्मणस्य चतुःषष्टिः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ब्राह्मणस्य चतुःषष्टिः  
पूर्णं वापि शतं भवेत् ।  
द्विगुणा वा चतुःषष्टिस्  
तद्दोषगुणविद् +धि सः  ॥ ८.३३८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/338_brAhmaNasya_chatuHShaShTiH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of theft, the guilt of a Śūdra is eightfold, that of the Vaiśya sixteen-fold, and that of the Kṣatriya thirty-two-fold;—(337) that of the Brāhmaṇa sixty-four-fold, or fully hundred-fold, or twice sixty-four-fold; when he is cognisant of the good or bad quality of the act.—(338)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**तद्दोषगुणविद् धि स** इति हेत्वभिधानाद् विदुषां दण्डो ऽयम् । यत्र खलजन एकं कार्षापणं दाप्यते तत्र विद्वान्[^१२२] शूद्रो ऽष्टगुणाम् । **अष्टभिः आपाद्यते** संबध्यते यत् **किल्बिषं** पापं तद् एवम् उच्यते । अष्टभिर् वापाद्यत आहन्यते गुण्यत इति यावत्, उभयथाप्य् अष्टगुणस्य वाचको **ऽष्टापद्य**शब्दः । एवं तद् एव द्विगुणं वैश्यस्य । स हि साक्षाद् अध्ययनज्ञानयोर् अधिकृतः । शूद्रस् तु कथंचिद् ब्राह्मणापाश्रिततत्संगत्या कियद् अपि ज्ञास्यति । क्षत्रियस् तु रक्षाधिकारदोषेण समाने विद्वत्त्वे ततो ऽपि द्विगुणं दण्ड्यते । ब्राह्मणे तु दण्डविधौ न तृप्यति । चतुःषष्टिः शतम्[^१२३] अष्टविंशं वा शतम्[^१२४] इति । तस्य हि प्रवचनम् उपदेष्टृत्वं वा, अधिकं च रक्षा[^१२५] ततो भवेत् । प्राकृतजनस्य तिर्यक्प्रख्यस्य को ऽपराधः[^१२६] । अविद्वांसो गुणदोषानभिज्ञा अकार्ये प्रवर्तन्ते । विद्वान् अपि तथैव चेद् वर्तेत हन्त हतं[^१२७] जगत्, तृतीयस्य शिक्षितुर् अभावात् । तद् उक्तं "द्वौ लोके[^१२८] धृतव्रतौ[^१२९] राजा ब्राह्मणश् च बहुश्रुतः" (ग्ध् ८.१) इति । राज्ञः पूर्वेण दण्डाधिक्यम् अनेन ब्राह्मणस्य । आधिक्यमात्राविधिश् चायं न यथाश्रुतसंख्याविधिः, ब्राह्मणदण्डे ऽनवस्थाश्रवणाद् अयं वायं वेति[^१३०] । न च विकल्पो युक्तो व्यवस्थाहेतुत्वाभावात् । तुल्यबलस्यैव विकल्पस्य परविषयाश्रयानुपपत्तेः[^१३१] । को हि राजा द्विजगुणम् उत्सृज्य चतुःषष्टिं ग्रहीष्यति । यदि परमदृष्टार्थे दण्डे[^१३२] विकल्पः, उपपद्येत । न चादृष्टार्थो ऽयम् इत्य् उक्तम् । तथा च गौतमः "विदुषो ऽतिक्रमे[^१३३] दण्डभूयस्त्वम्" इत्य् आह । तस्माद् अनवस्था विधित्वं व्याहरन्ति । न च गुणापेक्षो विकल्पो युक्तो नष्टादिश्लोकेनैव (म्ध् ८.२३२) विद्धत्वात् । अर्थवत्त्वाच्[^१३४] चात्र विध्यगतिः । स चाधिक्यविधौ लब्धालंबन इति न यथाश्रुतपरिकल्पने विकल्पने समर्थः ॥ ८.३३७–३८ ॥


[^१३४]:
M G DK: arthavādāc


[^१३३]:
M G J: 'tikrama-


[^१३२]:
J: paramadṛṣṭārtho daṇḍo


[^१३१]:
M G DK: tulyabalasyaiva viṣayasyānupapatteḥ


[^१३०]:
M G: ceti


[^१२९]:
J: dvau lokaviśrutau


[^१२८]:
M G: lokau


[^१२७]:
M G: hanta


[^१२६]:
M G: -prakhyasyāparādhaḥ


[^१२५]:
J: vādhikaṃ ca — yato rakṣā


[^१२४]:
DK (1: 1721): aṣṭaviṃśādhikaśatam


[^१२३]:
M G J: catuḥṣaṣṭiśatam


[^१२२]:
M G: tatrāvidvān
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 8.337-338)**

‘*When he is cognisant of the good or bad quality of the act*’;—this
points out the reason for what is here laid down; and from this it is
clear that the penalty here prescribed is meant for the educated. Thus
then, if for a guilt an ordinary man is fined one ‘*Kārṣāpaṇa*,’ the
learned *Śūdra* incurs the ‘*eight-fold guilt*;’—that is, that which is
connected with the number ‘eight,’ or that which is folded, multiplied,
eight times. In either case the term ‘*eight-fold*’ means that the
educated Śūdra’s guilt is eight times that of the ordinary man.

That of the *Vaiśya* is double that of the *Śūdra*; since he is himself
entitled to study the Veda and acquire the necessary knowledge, while
the *Śūdra* can learn only a little through serving or associating with
the *Brāhmam*.

As for the *Kṣatriya*, though, in the point of knowledge, he stands on
the same footing as the *Vaiśya*, yet, in as much as the protecting of
people forms part of his duty, his guilt is double that of the *Vaiśya*.

As regards the *Brāhmaṇa*, the author cannot be content with prescribing
any amount of penalty,—‘*sixty-four*,—*hundred,—hundred and
twenty-eight*.’ Since it is his duty to expound the duties of men and
instruct them, and thus guard them against evil.

What blame can attach to the common man, who is on the same level as the
lower animals? Uneducated men cannot know the good or bad character of
actions, and hence they are led to do what should not he done. If,
however, the educated men were also to behave in the same manner, then
alas! the world would be doomed! As there would be no third man to teach
men their duty,—it having been declared that—‘only two men are known in
the world—the King and the learned Brāhmaṇa.’ For the king, a heavy
punishment having been already prescribed in the preceding verse, the
present verse lays it down for the Brāhmaṇa.

Thus all that the present verse enjoins is *heavier punishment* (for the
Brāhmaṇa), and the exact numbers are not to be taken literally. Because
so far as the Brāhmaṇa is concerned, it has been declared that there can
be no limit to his punishment. Nor would it be right to lay down any
option—‘this or that’—in this case \[as it would be if the words were
taken literally \]; as there would be nothing to determine which of them
it should be in any particular case; since both the options being
equally authoritative, it would be impossible to find any case in which
the lower penalty could be imposed. What king is there, for instance,
who would accept only a sixty-four-fold fine, and give up one the double
of that figure? Further, one would have been admissible in the case only
if punishments were meant to serve a transcendental purpose; as a matter
of fact however, they are not meant to serve any transcendental purpose,
as we have already explained. Says Gautama (12.17)—‘For the educated
there should be heavier punishment.’ For these reasons the very
indefiniteness of the assertion deprives it of injunctive force. Nor
would it he right to take the option as determined by the qualifications
of the culprit; as this has been already laid down under verse 232, *et
seq*.

Further, the fact of the present passage being an injunction is
indicated by the purpose served by it; and as that purpose is served by
its being taken as prescribing *heavier punishment* in general, there
can be no justification for its being taken literally and hence laying
down options.—(337-338).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 8.337-338)**

These verses are quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.275), in support of the view
that the fine imposed for theft should vary with the caste of the thief;
whereon *Bālambhaṭṭī* notes two different readings (see Note I);—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 302):—and in *Vivādaratnākara* (342),
which adds the following notes:—‘*Aṣṭāpādyam*’ means ‘multiplied eight
times,’—‘*kilviṣam*,’ the amount of fine imposed as punishment; the
meaning thus is that the fine to be imposed upon a *learned śūdra*
should be eight times that on an *ignorant śūdra*; similarly in the case
of the Vaiśya and others also;—for the Brāhmaṇa the fine is to be either
full one hundred, or twice 64;—the reason for this is
‘*taddoṣaguṇaviddhi saḥ*,’—‘because the Brāhmaṇa is fully cognisant of
the evil character of theft—thus the fact of the culprit being cognisant
of the evil being a ground for enhanced penalty in the case of the
Brāhmaṇa, the same principle is to be applied to the case of the Śūdra
and others also. That offence for which the legal penalty for the Śūdra,
is *one*, for the Vaiśya, the Kṣatriya and the Brāhmaṇa, it should be
double the amount of the preceding; so that the penalty for the
*ignorant* Śūdra being one, that of the *learned* Śūdra is *eight
times*—aṇd that of the learned Vaiśya 16, the learned Kṣatriya 32 and
the learned Brāhmaṇa 64 times.

These are quoted also in *Prāyaścittāviveka* (p, 348), which says that
all that is meant is to deprecate the act, and to show that the gravity
of the offence is in proportion to the caste of the delinquent;—it
explains ‘*aṣṭāpādyam*’ as ‘that which is multiplied by *eight*;
*aṣṭābhiḥ āpadyate guṇyate iti*,’—the single unit being meant for those
lower than the Śūdra;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 144), which attributes
them to Yājñavalkya, and says that ‘*taddoṣaguṇavit*’ is to be construed
all through; so that the meaning is that the fine in the case of the
Śūdra who is cognisant of the seriousness of the offence is to be eight
times that of the ignorant man, and so on, the fine varying with the
qualifications of the offender.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.337-338)  
**

*Gautama* (12.15-17).—‘The value of property which a Śūdra unrighteously
acquires by theft, must be repaid eightfold;—for each of the other
castes, the fine shall be doubled; if a learned man offends, the
punishment shall be very much enhanced.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 51-52).—‘In theft, the crime of the *Śūdra* is eight
times (that of the lowest caste); of the *Vaiśya*, sixteen-fold; of the
*Kṣatriya*, thirty-two-fold; of the Brāhmaṇa sixty-four-fold—Knowledge
also makes a difference; for knowing persons, the punishment is
specially severe.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उक्तशेषाणां च द्रव्याणाम् अपहरणे एष दण्डः स्यात् । एतेषाम् एव वा स्तेयाभ्यासे सुवर्ण[स्तेये वा । विदुषो ऽतिर]मे दण्डभूयस्त्वम् । एवं राज्ञो ऽपि स्यात् । तथायं पूर्वशेषत्वाद् अर्थवाद एष, न दण्डविधिः । यदि चास्यार्थवादत्वं भवति ततो वाग्दण्डपारुष्यादिषु [यत् यत्] दण्डालपत्वम् उक्तं तत् समञ्जसं भवति । अथ श्रुतिसामर्थ्याद् यथोपदेशम् अयं दण्डविकल्प इष्यते, यथा प्रकाशरहस्यप्रायश्चित्तेषु ततो ऽस्य विधित्वम् । एवं च सति ब्राह्मणदण्डविकल्पश् च वृद्धस्वाध्याय्यपक्षया (?) वेदितव्यः, यथान्यत्र । स्तेयापवादार्थं त्व् इदम् अधुनोच्यते ॥ ८.३३७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

338	That of a Brahmana sixty-fourfold, or quite a hundredfold, or (even) twice four-and-sixtyfold; (each of them) knowing the nature of the offence.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/339_vAnaspatyam_mUla-phalam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>339 वानस्पत्यम् मूल-फलम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वानस्पत्यं मूल-फलं  
दार्व् अग्न्य्-अर्थं तथैव च ।  
तृणं च गोभ्यो ग्रासार्थम्  
अस्तेयं मनुर् अब्रवीत्  ॥ ८.३३९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/339_vAnaspatyam_mUla-phalam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Fuel for fire and trees, roots and fruits, and grass, for feeding cows,—the taking of these Manu has declared to be no theft.—(339)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

वनस्पतय[^१३५] एव **वानस्पत्यं** वृक्षाः । स्वार्थे प्रत्ययः । **ग्रासार्थं** गृह्यमाणम् **अस्तेयं** वंशाङ्कुरादि । **मूलफलं** वनस्पतीनाम् अन्यद् बिससस्यादि । सूत्रादिगणे (म्ध् ८.३२६) अग्रासार्थं मूलफलाहरणे दण्ड उक्तः । **अस्तेय**वचनं **ग्रासार्थम्,** मात्रार्थम्[^१३६] अक्षीणवृत्तेर् अपि कथंचिज् जातलौल्यस्य स्मृत्यन्तरदर्शनात् स्वापरिवृत्तेश्[^१३७] च दण्डः । तथा च **गौतमः-** "पुष्पाणि स्ववद् आददीत फलानि चापरिवृत्तानाम्" (ग्ध् १२.२८) इति । **दार्वग्न्यार्थम्,**[^१३८] आहिताग्नेर् असंनिहिते वनस्पताव् उद्वात्य् अग्नौ तद्धारणार्थं काष्ठम् अदोषम्, पालाशीर् वा समिधो व्यादध्यात् । अप्रचुरपलाशे च ग्रामे कथं स्याद् इति यदि गृह्येरन्[^१३९] न दोषः । **तृणं च गोभ्यः** । तादर्थ्ये चतुर्थी । गोग्रहणात् प्रस्तारार्थं दोष एव । ये तु ग्रासार्थपदेन गवाम् अभिसंबन्धम् इच्छन्ति तेषां गोभ्य इति नोपपद्यते । षष्ठी हि तत्र युक्ता ॥ ८.३३९ ॥


[^१३९]:
     M G: syād ityādi gṛhyeran; J: syād ityāditi gṛhyeran


[^१३८]:
     M G: doṣārtham


[^१३७]:
     J: -darśanāc cāparivṛtteś


[^१३६]:
     J: grāsārthamātrārtham


[^१३५]:
     M G: vanaspata; Dk (1: 1722): vanaspatir
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Vānaspatyam*’ stands for *trees*, ‘*vanaspati*’;—the affix having the
reflexive force. When this is taken ‘*for feeding cows*,’ it is not
‘theft.’

‘*Roots and fruits*’—of trees; as also lotus-roots, corns and so forth.

Under verse 326 *et seq*., punishment has been prescribed in connection
with ‘roots and fruits,’ along with ‘yarns’ and other things,—when taken
for purposes other than the feeding of cows. Hence when the act is here
said to be ‘not theft,’ it refers only to cases where they are taken
‘*for feeding cows*.’

According to another Smṛti-text however, punishment has got to be
inflicted in a case where the man is not suffering from any actual
shortage, and he takes the things through sheer childishness; specially
when they are within an enclosure. Says Gautama (12.28)—‘Fruits and
flowers one may take as his own, of tre.es that are not enclosed.’

‘*Fuel for fire*’;—if the man who has set up the fire finds no trees
near him, and finds that the fire would be extinguished, if he takes
fuel for keeping it alive, there is no harm in this, he might supply the
lire with fuel consisting of leaves; but in a village where leaves are
not available in large quantities, if he takes some fuel, there can be
no harm in this.

‘*Grass for cows*’;—the Dative in ‘*gobhyaḥ*’ means ‘for the sake of.’

In as much as the text specifies this, it would be wrong if the grass
were taken for the purpose of making mats.

Some people hold that the term ‘grass’ itself indicates that it is meant
for *cows*. But for them there would be no justification for the
presence of the term ‘*for cows*,’ ‘*goḥbyaḥ* (*gobhyaḥ*?)’ (with the
Dative); as in that case the Genitive would be the right form.—(339)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vidhānapārijāta* (II, p. 252);—in
*Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 116), which says that what is meant is that the
sin of the act is removed by the use mentioned, and *not* that it is not
a case of ‘theft’;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 147), which says that
the ‘*fruits*’ meant should be such as do not belong to another person.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (12.28).—‘One may take as one’s own, grass for a cow, and fuel
for his fire; as also flowers of creepers and trees and their fruit, if
these be unfenced.’

*Āpastamba* (1.28.1-6).—‘He who, under any condition whatsoever, covets
and takes another man’s property is a *thief*; thus teach Kautsa and
Hārīta, as well as Kaṇva and Puskarsādi. Vārsyāyani declares that there
are exceptions to this law, in regard to some things;—*e.g*., seeds
ripening in the pod, food for a draught-ox; if these are taken, the
owner should not forbid it. To take even these in large quantities is
sinful. Hārīta declares that in every case the permission of the owner
must he obtained first.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.166).—‘Grass, fuel and flowers, the twice-born may take
from all places.’

*Smṛtyantara* (Aparārka, p. 774).—‘Grass, wood, flower or fruit—if one
takes any of these without permission, he deserves to have his hand cut
oil.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 22-24).—‘For stealing, wood, cane, grass and the
like...... vegetables, green roots, grass or flowers... a fine of five
times the value of the article stolen.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अग्निग्रहणाच् च लिङ्गात् सर्वम् एतद् यज्ञार्थम् अप्रत्यवायकरम् । तथा च वक्ष्यति- "आहरेत् त्रीणि वा द्वे वा" इति । तस्करप्रतिग्रहादिकर्तुर् ब्राह्मणस्य विजानतश् चोरसमत्वप्रदर्शनार्थम् इदम् आह दण्डार्थम् ॥ ८.३३८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

339	(The taking of) roots and of fruit from trees, of wood for a (sacrificial) fire, and of grass for feeding cows, Manu has declared (to be) no theft.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/340_yo.adattA-.adAyino.md">
<details open><summary><h3>340 यो ऽदत्ताऽऽदायिनो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यो ऽदत्ताऽऽदायिनो+++(=स्तेनस्य)+++ हस्ताल्  
लिप्सेत ब्राह्मणो धनम् ।  
याजनाध्यापनेनाऽपि +++(लिप्सायाम्)+++  
यथा स्तेनस् तथैव सः  ॥ ८.३४० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/340_yo.adattA-.adAyino.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a Brāhmaṇa seeks, even by sacrificing and teaching, to obtain wealth from one who has taken what has not been given to him,—he is just like a thief.—(340)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अतिदेशो ऽयम् । **यो** **ब्राह्मणश्** चौरान् उपजीवति स चोरवद् दण्ड्यः । **याजनाध्यापनेनापि** । अपिः क्रियान्तरसूचकः । तेन प्रतिग्रहप्रीत्यादायादि गृह्यते[^१४०] । क्षत्रियादीनाम् अन्यथैव वार्तादिस्वकर्मणा[^१४१] चोरधनं गृह्णताम् । ब्राह्मणग्रहणं तु मया "किल धर्मेणार्जितं याजयता" इत्य् अभिमाननिवृत्त्यर्थम् । अदत्तम् आदत्ते गृह्णातीत्य् **अदत्तादायी** चोरः । **लिप्सेत** लब्धुम् इच्छेद् अगृहीतास्व् अपि दक्षिणासु तत्संबन्धाद् एव चौरनिग्रहः ॥ ८.३४० ॥


[^१४१]:
     M G: anyathaiva vārtā svakarmaṇā; J: anyathaiva vṛttiḥ vārtādi | svakarmaṇā


[^१४०]:
     M G: -prītyādāyāpi gṛhyante; DK (1: 1697): prītidāyā api gṛhyante
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This text is in the form of a corollary. the meaning is that the
Brāhmaṇa who derives his livelihood from thieves should he punished like
a thief.

‘*Even by sacrificing and teaching*’;—the term ‘even’ indicates other
acts also; so that *accepting gifts* and friendly presents, etc., also
become included.

Of the *Kṣatriya* and other castes, the means of living are other than
these; such as trade and the rest. So that to their case the rule would
apply if they received the property of thieves in the course of such
transactions.

The Brāhmaṇa has been specially mentioned, with a view to prevent the
possibility of his entertaining such ideas as ‘I have acquired this by
the lawful me ms of sacrificing for the man.’

‘*Who has taken what was not given to him*’—*i.e*., the thief.

‘*Seeks to obtain*’—wishes to acquire.

If even though he may not have actually received the sacrificial fee,
yet, he should he punished like a thief, simply on the ground of his
having associated and having had dealings with a thief.—(340)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 340), which explains
‘*adattādāyin*’ as *the thief*, and adds that ‘*api*’ includes also
*gifts* and so forth;—and in *Mitākṣarā* (2.113), which remarks that if
‘proprietary right’ were something purely *temporal*, then there would
be no justification for the penalty being inflicted on the Brāhmaṇa who
acquires wealth by teaching and sacrificing for thieves, as laid down in
the present text. *Bālambhaṭṭī* has the following notes:—‘*Adattādāyin*’
means ‘one who *takes* (*ādadāti*) another’s property when it is *not
given* (*adattam*) by him’;—in ‘*yājanādhyāpanena*’ (or ‘—*nāt*’ as read
in *Mitākṣarā*) we have the causative copulative compound;—‘*api*’
includes *gift* also.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 992);—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 144).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (12.49-50).—‘A man who knowingly becomes the servant of a
thief shall be treated like a thief;—likewise he who knowingly receives
goods from a thief or an unrighteous man.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 340).—‘Purchasers of stolen property
and accepters of gifts from thieves, as also those who lend them cover,
have been declared to be deserving of the same punishment as the thief.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवं च चोरसमत्वाच् चोरवद् दण्ड्यो ऽसौ । अधुना निमित्ते स्वल्पम् अनुजानाति परादानम् ॥ ८.३३९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

340	A Brahmana, seeking to obtain property from a man who took what was not given to him, either by sacrificing for him or by teaching him, is even like a thief.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/341_dvijo.adhvagaH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>341 द्विजो ऽध्वगः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

द्विजो ऽध्वगः क्षीण-वृत्तिर्  
द्वाव् इक्षू द्वे च मूलके ।  
आददानः परक्षेत्रान्  
न दण्डं दातुम् अर्हति  ॥ ८.३४१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/341_dvijo.adhvagaH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a twice-born person, running short of provisions while on a journey, takes two sugar-cane stalks, or two roots, from another man’s field, he does not deserve to be made to pay a fine.—(341)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**द्विज**ग्रहणं शूद्रप्रतिषेधार्थम् । **अध्वगो** नैकग्रामवासी । तत्रापि **क्षीणवृत्तिः** क्षीणपथ्योदनः । **द्वाव् इक्षू** दण्डौ, **मूलके,** प्रदर्शनार्थं चैतत् परिमितहरीतकमुद्गादिशमीधान्यानाम् । तथा च "शमीत्रपुसयुग्यघासेषु च न प्रतिषेधः"[^१४२] इति स्मृत्यन्तरम् । **परक्षेत्रात्** परकीयस्थानाद् इत्यर्थः, परिवृताद् अपि ॥ ८.३४१ ॥


[^१४२]:
     M G J: nāpratiṣedhaḥ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The text has used the term ‘*twice-born person*’ with a view to preclude
*Śūdras*.

‘*On a journey*’—*i.e*., not an inhabitant of the same village;—hut
there also he should be one ‘*who has run short of provisions*’—*i.e*.,
whose journey-rations have been exhausted.

‘*Two sugar-cane stalks*’ and ‘*two roots*’;—these are mentioned only by
way of illustration, indicating small quantities of green vegetables,
*mudga* -grains, leguminous grains and so forth. Says another
Smṛti-text—‘There is no prohibition regarding leguminous grains,
cucumber and grass.’

‘*From another man’s field*’—*i.e*., from a place belonging to another
person;—even though it be within an enclosure.—(341)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣara* (2.275), to the effect that there is
no punishment for way-farers stealing some little things on the way.
*Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the following notes:—‘*Adhvāga*,’
way-farer,—‘*kṣīṇavṛttiḥ*,’ with his food-supply exhausted.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 314);—in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 146), which explains ‘*kṣīṇavṛttiḥ*’ as having no
food for the journey;—and in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 124).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

See Manu, 11.16-17.
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

एवं च राजदण्डप्रतिषेदार्थो ऽयम् आरम्भो ऽर्थलक्षणे सति स्तेये, न तु चौर्याभ्यनुज्ञा । एतेनादोषः । शाकमत्स्यादिग्रहणं व्याख्यातम् ॥ ८.३४० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

341	A twice-born man, who is travelling and whose provisions are exhausted, shall not be fined, if he takes two stalks of sugar-cane or two (esculent) roots from the field of another man.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/342_asanditAnAM_sandAtA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>342 असन्दितानां सन्दाता ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

असंदितानां संदाता  
संदितानां च मोक्षकः ।  
दासाश्व-रथहर्ता च  
प्राप्तः स्याच् चोरकिल्बिषम्  ॥ ८.३४२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/342_asanditAnAM_sandAtA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One who enchains the unchained, or sets free the enchained, as also one who takes away a slave, a horse or a chariot, incurs the guilt of the thief.—(342)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पास्वादयो विमुक्तशृङ्खलादिबन्धना मुस्तादियवभूयिष्ठेषु विजनेषु वार्यन्ते । ततश् चेन् निद्रायति स्वामिनि पाले वा कश्चित् संदानवतः कुर्यात्, खलीनकबन्धादिना नूनं निनीषत्य् असाव् इति शङ्कया चौरवद् दण्ड्यः । यस् तु स्वामिगृहच्युतं यूथभ्रंशागतं वा रक्षितुम् एव वा बध्नीयान् न तस्य दोषः । एवं गवादीनाम् अपि गले दामादिसंदाने[^१४३] एष एव दमः । ये च **संदिताः** पादस्थशृङ्खलादिना, तेषाम् **मोक्षकः** । **दामांश्** च रहसि प्रोत्साह्य भक्तदासादीन् अपहरति "अहं ते बहु ददामि किम् एतं भजसे" इति । कुलीनानां हरणे वध उक्तः "पुरुषाणाम्" (म्ध् ८.३२३) इत्य् अत्र । अनेन दासानाम् उच्यते[^१४४] । यथा[^१४५] तत्रैव कुलीनम् उक्तम् एवम् अत्रापि[^१४६] प्रोत्साह्य नयनं ग्रहणं[^१४७] न कर्तव्यम् । तत्र प्रबलादिना[^१४८] चौर्येण वेति । **अश्वरथहर्तेति** । अश्वानां रथानां च । "महापशूनाम्" (म्ध् ८.३२४) इत्य् अत्र राजसंबन्धिनो ऽश्वाः, इमे तु जनपदानाम् । तत्र[^१४९] राजेच्छया दण्डः, इह तु नियतो वधः । यद्य् अपि बहवश् चोरदण्डास् तथापि स्मृत्यन्तरे ।


[^१४९]:
     M G omit: tatra


[^१४८]:
     DK: tac ca balādinā


[^१४७]:
     M G DK: nayanagrahaṇaṃ


[^१४६]:
     M G DK omit: atrāpi


[^१४५]:
     M G: yady evaṃ; DK (1: 1712): yata eva


[^१४४]:
     M G: dāsā mucyante


[^१४३]:
     M G: -saṃjāta; J: - saṃjanane

- बन्दिग्राहांस् तथा वाजिकुञ्जराणां च हारिणः ।

- प्रसह्य घातिनश् चैव शूलम् आरोपयेन् नरान् ॥ इति । (य्ध् २.२७७)

इहापि सामान्यतो[^१५०] "येन येन" इत्य् उपक्रम्य "तत् तद् एव हरेत्" इति (म्ध् ८.३३४) । 


[^१५०]:
     M G DK: sāmānyadaṇḍo

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये त्व् अश्वयुक्तो रथ इति सामान्यं मन्यन्ते, प्रदर्शनाच् चाश्वगोरथादीनाम् । 

<u>तत्र</u> केवलानाम् अश्वानां रथस्य च दण्डश् चिन्त्यः । स्मृत्यन्तरे केवलानाम् अश्वानां चौरदण्डस्योक्तत्वात्, रथयुक्तानाम् अपि सिद्धः[^१५१] । ये तु प्रोत्साह्य नयनं हरणं मन्यन्ते, तेषाम् अश्वरथशब्देन रथकारो लक्ष्यते, रथकर्तेति । तच् च[^१५२] सर्वशिल्पार्थम् । शिल्पिनां हरणे चौरदण्डः । अश्वानाम् अपि प्रोत्साहनं वडवादर्शनेन ॥ ८.३४२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Sometimes horses and other animals, freed from their tethers, are found
to be grazing in fields covered with fodder; if during the time the
master of the Held or the keeper of the cattle happen to be asleep, and
some one else ‘*enchains*’—ties them up,—the presumption is that he is
going to steal the cattle, and hence he deserves to be punished like a
thief. But there is nothing wrong in a case where one ties up an animal
that may have strayed either from the owner’s house or from the. herd,
with a view to keeping it from harm.

The same penalty applies to one who puts a rope round the neck of the
cow; also to one who ‘*sets free*’ those that are ‘*enchained*’—tied up
with chains in the feet.

Similarly one who ‘*takes away slaves*’—those engaged to serve in return
for maintenance,—by enticing them with such words as—‘I shall pay yon
more, why do you stick to this man?’

For the enticing away of persons of noble families, the ‘death-penalty’
has been laid down above under 323, and the present verso lays down that
for enticing slaves and similar persons; and just as in the former case
what is meant is that persons belonging to noble families should not be
enticed away, nor forcibly carried away by stealth,—so in the present
case also.

‘*Who takes away horses and chariots*’;—Verse 324 has referred to horses
belonging to the king, the present refers to those belonging to the
people. In the former case the punishment depends upon the Rājā’s wish,
but in the present case ‘immolation’ is strictly laid down.

Though there are several forms of punishment for thieves, yet
‘immolation’ is what should be taken to be meant here, on the strength
of what is laid down in other Smṛti texts, such as—‘Those who entice
away prisoners, horses and elephants and those who attach people by
force should be impaled.’ In the present case however the general law
relating to thieves—that of cutting off the limb whereby he does the
act—may be applied.

Others take this verse to refer to ‘chariots with horses yoked to them,’
which includes the *bullock-cart* and the rest also.

Under this explanation, the exact punishment for the stealing of *horses
only*, or *chariots only*, would have to be found out; specially as in
other *smṛti* -texts, ‘immolation’ has been prescribed for the stealing
of *horses only*. It may be that the same penalty may apply also to the
case of stealing *horses along with chariots*.

According to those who explain the ‘*haraṇa*,’ ‘*taking away*,’ of the
text as *enticing away with inducements*, the term ‘*chariot*’ has to be
taken as standing for the *chariot-maker*; and this would include all
kinds of mechanics. So that for enticing away a mechanic, the penalty
would be the same as that in the case of the thief. Horses also are
‘enticed away with inducements’ by having a mare placed before
them.—(342)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 319), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Sandhātā*,’ one who ties up with a view to taking it
away;—similarly ‘*vimokṣakaḥ*’ (which is its reading for ‘*ca
mokṣakaḥ*’), is one who sets it free with the intention of taking
it;—‘*caurakilviṣam*,’ the penalty for theft, corporal or monetary;—and
in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 136) which explains the meaning to be that the
punishment is to be meted out to (1) the person who tethers untethered
cattle for the purpose of taking it away, or (2) one who untethers those
that are tethered, for taking them away, or (3) one who deprives one of
any one of the properties mentioned,—*i*.*e*. the share and the rest.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

[See Texts under CCCXXV
above.]
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अश्वरथग्रहणं च वाहनसामान्याद् उष्ट्रादिप्रदर्शनार्थम् इदं द्रष्टव्यम् ॥ ८.३४१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

342	He who ties up unbound or sets free tied up (cattle of other men), he who takes a slave, a horse, or a carriage will have incurred the guilt of a thief.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/343_anena_vidhinA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>343 अनेन विधिना ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अनेन विधिना राजा  
कुर्वाणः स्तेननिग्रहम् ।  
यशो ऽस्मिन् प्राप्नुयाल् लोके  
प्रेत्य चाऽनुत्तमं सुखम्  ॥ ८.३४३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/343_anena_vidhinA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

By punishing thieves in accordance with th is law, the king obtains fame in this world, and after death, unsurpassable bliss.—(343)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अनेना**न्तरप्रक्रान्तेन[^१५३] मार्गेण **चौरनिग्रहं कुर्वाणो यशः** सकलजनसाधुवादो **अस्मिंऌ लोके** यावज्जीवम्, **प्रेत्य** मृतश् च्**आनुत्तमं**[^१५४] स्वर्गाख्यं **सुखम्** अश्नुत इति । प्रकरणोपसंहारो ऽयम् ॥ ८.३४३ ॥


[^१५४]:
     M G: mṛtasyānuttamaṃ


[^१५३]:
     DK (1: 1727): anenānantara-
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the manner described above, he who punishes thieves, obtains
‘*fame*’—praise from all men, ‘*in this world*,’ as long as he lives;
and ‘*after death, unsurpassable bliss*’ in the shape of Heaven.

This sums up the section.—(343)
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

उपसंहारार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.३४२ ॥

_साहसम् अधुनोच्यते ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

343	A king who punishes thieves according to these rules, will gain fame in this world and after death unsurpassable bliss.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/344_aindraM_sthAnam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>344 ऐन्द्रं स्थानम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ऐन्द्रं स्थानम् अभिप्रेप्सुर्  
यशश् चाऽक्षयम् अव्ययम् ।  
नोपेक्षेत क्षणम् अपि  
राजा साहसिकं नरम्  ॥ ८.३४४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/344_aindraM_sthAnam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king who is desirous of indra’s eternal place, as also of imperishable fame, shall not ignore the desperado even for a moment.—(344)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

सहो बलम्, तेन वर्तते **साहसिकः** । दृष्टादृष्टदोषान् अपरिगणय्य बलमात्रम् आश्रित्य स्तेयहिंसासंग्रहणादिपरपीडाकरेषु वर्तमानः प्रकाशं पुरुषः **साहसिकः** । तद् उक्तं "स्यात् सहसम्" (म्ध् ८.३३२) इति । न स्तेयादिभ्यः पदार्थान्तरं साहसम्, किं तु प्रसह्यकारणात् तान्य् एव साहसानि भवन्ति । यद्य् अप्य् अग्निदाहवस्त्रपाटनादि तद् अपि[^१५५] द्रव्यनाशात्मकत्वात् सिद्धम् एवेति,[^१५६] तस्य निग्रहात्[^१५७] **नोपेक्षेत** न विलंबेत क्षणम् अपि, यदा गृहीतस् तदैव निगृहीतव्यः । इन्द्रस्वामिकं **स्थानं** स्वर्गाख्यम् **ऐन्द्रं** तदाभिमुख्येन प्राप्तुम् इच्छन् । अथ वा स्वम् एव राज्यपदम् ऐन्द्रम् इवेच्छन्न्[^१५८] अविच्चालित्वसामान्यम्, निग्राह्य निग्रहेण हि प्रतापानुग्रहाभ्यां प्रजा अनुप्रवर्तन्ते । तद् उक्तम् "समुद्रम् इव सिन्धवः" (म्ध् ८.१७५) इति । **यशो ऽक्षयम् अव्ययं** च । द्वे विशेष्ये द्वे विशेषणे,[^१५९] स्थानम् अव्ययं यशो ऽक्षयम् इति । अथोभयेनापि यशो विशिष्यते, क्षयो मात्रापचयः, व्ययो निरन्वयविनाशः । उभयम् अपि तन् नास्ति । न मलिनीभवति यशो न कदाचिद् विच्छिद्यते । भूतार्थवादस्तुतिर् इयम् ॥ ८.३४४ ॥


[^१५९]:
     M G DK: dvaidhaviśeṣyaviśeṣaṇe


[^१५८]:
     M G: iva gacchann


[^१५७]:
     M G: nigraho; DK: nigrahaṃ


[^१५६]:
     M G DK: siddhaiveti


[^१५५]:
     M G DK (1: 1622): sāpi
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the terra ‘*sāhasikaḥ*,’ ‘*desperado*,’ ‘desperation’ means
*violence*; hence the ‘desperado’ is one who commits violence; *i.e*,
the man who, not minding either the physical or spiritual effects of his
acts, is prompted by the sheer spirit of violence, and openly engages
himself in causing suffering to others by such acts as theft, hurt,
adultery and so forth. This is what has been already [referred to under
332].

This ‘violence’ is not anything different from *theft* and the rest;
these same acts are called ‘violent crimes’ when they are done with a
certain amount of daring. Such acts as setting fire, tearing clothes and
the like, are also ‘acts of violence,’ since they involve the
destruction of property.

The punishment of such a person the king ‘*shall not ignore*,’—should
not delay,—‘*even for a single moment*,’ *i.e*., he should be punished
the moment he is caught.

‘*Indra’s place*,’—the place that belongs to Indra, *i.e*., Heaven;—‘*he
who seeks to obtain*’ that; or he who desires his own kingly position to
be ‘*aindra*,’ like that of Indra, in point of stability.

If the king punishes those that deserve to be punished,—exercising both
rigour and mercy—his people become attached to him,—‘as the rivers to
the ocean,’ as described above.

‘*Imperishable and eternal fame*’;—we have two qualifying epithets,
because we have two nouns to qualify—‘*eternal place*,’ and
‘*imperishable fame*.’ Or both the epithets may he taken as qualifying
‘fame’;—‘*perishing*’ denoting *lessening of quantity*, and
‘*non-eternality*,’ *absolute destruction*. And both these qualities
belong to the ‘fame’; it never wanes, and it never dies.

This is a valedictory description of things as they happen.—(344)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (18.30).—‘When the King seated on the throne of judgment, full
of majesty, deals out punishment, equitable towards all creatures, he is
called *Vaivasvata*.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.107).—‘For cases of murder, thieving, robbery and
felonies, there is no fixed time; these should he adjudicated at once.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

साहसोपन्यासार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.३४३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

344	A king who desires to gain the throne of Indra and imperishable eternal fame, shall not, even for a moment, neglect (to punish) the man who commits violence.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/345_vAgduShTAt_taskarAch.md">
<details open><summary><h3>345 वाग्दुष्टात् तस्कराच् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वाग्दुष्टात् तस्कराच् चैव  
दण्डेनैव च हिंसतः ।  
साहसस्य नरः कर्ता  
विज्ञेयः पापकृत्तमः  ॥ ८.३४५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/345_vAgduShTAt_taskarAch.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who commits violence is to be regarded as the worst offender, as compared to one who is wicked of speech, to a thief and to one who hurts with a staff.—(310)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अयम् अपरार्थवादो निग्रहविधिस्तुत्यर्थः । वाचा दुष्टो **वाग्दुष्टस्** तस्करश् चौरः[^१६०] । **दण्डेनैव** दण्डपारुष्यकृत्[^१६१] । दण्डः प्रहरणोपलक्षणार्थः । त्रिभ्य एतेभ्यो ऽनन्तरातिक्रान्तेभ्यः पापकारिभ्यो ऽयम् अतिशयेन **पापकृत्तमः** ॥ ८.३४५ ॥


[^१६१]:
     M G: daṇḍyaḥ | pāruṣyakṛt


[^१६०]:
     M G J: caura-
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This is another declamation eulogising the injunction of punishment.

‘*Wicked of speech*’;—he who offends with words.

‘*Taskara*’ is a thief.

‘*With a staff*’— the ‘*staff*’ stands here for anything that hurts, any
weapon.

In comparison to all these three kinds of offenders, dealt with in the
three foregoing sections, the one going to be dealt with now is the
worst.—(345)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.345-347)  
**

*Nārada* (14-1 *et seq*.).—‘Whatever act is performed by persons
inflamed with strength is called *Violence*. Manslaughter, robbery,
indecent assault on another man’s wife, the two kinds of assault are the
four kinds of Violence. Destroying, reviling, disfiguring or otherwise
injuring fruits, roots, water and the like, or agricultural
implements............ The punishment to be inflicted for Violence shall
be proportionate to the heaviness of the crime, but it shall not be less
than a hundred.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

_यतश् चैतद् एवम् अतः ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

345	He who commits violence must be considered as the worst offender, (more wicked) than a defamer, than a thief, and than he who injures (another) with a staff.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/346_sAhase_vartamAnam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>346 साहसे वर्तमानम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

साहसे वर्तमानं तु  
यो मर्षयति पार्थिवः ।  
स विनाशं व्रजत्य् आशु  
विद्वेषं चाऽधिगच्छति  ॥ ८.३४६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/346_sAhase_vartamAnam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king who condones the perpetrator of violence quickly falls into destruction and incurs hatred.—(346)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अयम् अप्य् अर्थवादः । **साहसे** स्थितं पुरुषं **यो मर्षयति** । प्रकृत्यर्थे ऽयं णिच् । यो मृष्यति क्षमते, **स विनाशं** प्राप्नोति द्वेष्यतां च प्रजासु प्राप्नोति द्वेष्यैश् चाभिभूयते ॥ ८.३४६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This also is a declamation.

He who condones the man addicted to violence—the causal affix in
‘*marṣayati*’ having the reflexive force, it means ‘forgives,’ ‘bears
with,’—‘*quickly falls into destruction*,’ and becomes hated among his
people; and being thus hated, he comes to be assailed and
overcome.—(346)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.345-347)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.345].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

_एवं च सति ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

346	But that king who pardons the perpetrator of violence quickly perishes and incurs hatred.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/347_na_mitrakAraNAd.md">
<details open><summary><h3>347 न मित्रकारणाद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

न मित्रकारणाद् राजा  
विपुलाद् वा धनागमात् ।  
समुत्सृजेत् साहसिकान्  
सर्वभूतभयावहान्  ॥ ८.३४७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/347_na_mitrakAraNAd.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Neither for the sake of friendship, nor for the sake of a large gain of money, should the king let off the perpetrators of violence, who cause terror to all living beings.—(347)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अत आह पार्श्वथस्य[^१६२] कस्यचित् स्नेहहेतोर् अमात्यादिना पार्थ्यमानो न मृष्येत् । अथ वा स एवातिबहुधनं ददातीति नोपेक्षेत[^१६३] । सर्वेषां भूतानां भयम् आवहन्ति **साहसिकाः** । अयम् अप्य् अर्थवादः ॥ ८.३४७ ॥


[^१६३]:
     M G: nāpekṣeta


[^१६२]:
     M G: pārśvatīyasya
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

For the reasons explained above, it is added—on account of his own
friendship with the criminal,—or at the request of the minister or some
other officer—or with the idea that the criminal himself is giving him a
large amount of money,—the king shall not condone him; since
perpetrators of violence cause terror to all creatures.

This also is purely declamatory.—(317)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.345-347)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.345].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

साहसिकनिन्दैषा तन्निग्रहादरार्था विज्ञेया । अन्याय्यशस्त्रग्रहणस्य वर्णस्य शस्त्रग्रहणं साहसम् । तेन यो वर्तते स साहसिकः । एवं च सति तद्दोषप्रतिषेधार्थं निमित्ततः शस्त्रग्रहणं द्विजातेर् इदं तदपवादभूतम् आरभ्यते ॥ ८.३४६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

347	Neither for friendship's sake, nor for the sake of great lucre, must a king let go perpetrators of violence, who cause terror to all creatures.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/348_shastran_dvijAtibhir.md">
<details open><summary><h3>348 शस्त्रन् द्विजातिभिर् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

शस्त्रं द्विजातिभिर् ग्राह्यं  
धर्मो यत्रोपरुध्यते ।  
द्विजातीनां च वर्णानां  
विप्लवे कालकारिते  ॥ ८.३४८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/348_shastran_dvijAtibhir.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

348	Twice-born men may take up arms when (they are) hindered (in the fulfilment of their duties, when destruction (threatens) the twice-born castes (varna) in (evil) times,
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/349_Atmanash_cha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>349 आत्मनश् च ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

आत्मनश् च परित्राणे  
दक्षिणानां च संगरे ।  
स्त्री-विप्राभ्युपपत्तौ च  
घ्नन् धर्मेण न दुष्यति  ॥ ८.३४९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/349_Atmanash_cha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Twice-born persons shall carry arms: When religion is interfered with, when there is confusion among the twice-born castes caused by the exigencies of time,—(348) in his own defence, in cases of hindrance of sacrificial fees, in the case of outrages upon Brāhmaṇas and women,—if one strikes in the cause of right, he incurs no sin.—(319)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"वैणवीं धारेय्द् यष्टिम्" (म्ध् ४.३६) इति विधानाद् अनुमितशस्त्रग्रहणाः[^१६४] श्रोत्रियाः । स्वबलाविष्टं भवति च साहसिके बलातिशयधायी[^१६५] शस्त्रम् । अतः साहसिकत्वाशङ्कया[^१६६] शस्त्रग्रहणम् अप्राप्तं विधीयते- **शस्त्रं द्विजातिभिर् ग्राह्यम्** इति । एतावता वाक्यं विच्छिद्यते । अवशिष्टं तु **घ्नन् धर्मेण** इत्य् अनेनाभिसंबध्यत इत्य् अतो द्वे एते वाक्ये ।


[^१६६]:
M G: sāhasikatvācchaktāya


[^१६५]:
M G: balātiśayadhāyīva; DK: balātiśayadhāyī ca


[^१६४]:
M G DK (1: 1623): anuditaśastragrahaṇāḥ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ये त्व् एतेष्व् एव निमित्तेषु ग्रहणम् इच्छन्ति नान्यदेति, तेषाम् अतर्कितोपनताततायीमुखपतितस्य[^१६७] अशस्त्रस्य का गतिः । न हि ते शस्त्रग्रहणं तस्य प्रतिपालयन्ति ।


[^१६७]:
M G: atarkitapopana-

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अथैवं व्याख्यायते **धर्मो यत्रोपरुध्यते** **विप्लवे कालकारिते** राजनि व्यतिक्रान्ते संस्थायां प्रवृत्तायां शस्त्रं ग्राह्यम् । अन्यदा तु सौराज्ये राजैव रक्षतीति ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;न हि प्रसार्य हस्तौ राजा प्रतिपुरुषम् आसितुं शक्नोति । भवन्ति केचिद् दुरात्मानो ये राजपुरुषान् अपि शूरतमाभियुक्तान् बाधन्ते, शस्त्रवतस् तु बिभ्यतीति सार्वकालिकं शस्त्रधारणं युक्तम् ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;किं पुनर् ग्रहणमात्रं[^१६८] बिभीषिकाजननमात्रम् ।


[^१६८]:
DK: grahaṇam atra

<u>नेत्य्</u> आह- **घ्नन् धर्मेण न दुष्यतीति** । हिंसापर्यन्तो ऽयम् उपदेशः । यत् त्व् आपस्तम्बेनोक्तम्- "न ब्राह्मणः परीक्षार्थम् अपि शस्त्रम् आददीत" इति, असति यथाभिहिते[^१६९] निमित्त आकर्षणस्य प्रतिषेधो न ग्रहणस्य । विकोशा हि परीक्ष्यन्ते ।  
**धर्मस्योपरोधो** यदा यज्ञादीनां विनाशः कैश्चित् क्रियते । **वर्णानां विप्लवो** ऽव्यवस्थानं वर्णसंकरादि । **कालकारिते**[^१७०] राजमरणादौ । तत्र स्वधनकुटुम्बरक्षार्थं शस्त्रं ग्राह्यम् ।



[^१७०]:
M G: śavakālakārite; DK: kāryakālakārite

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु परार्थम् अप्य् अस्मिन्न् अवसरे । तथा च गौतमः- "दुर्बलहिंसायां च विमोचने शक्तश् चेत्" (ग्ध् २१.१९) इति ।

उक्तं यज्ञविनाशशङ्कानिवृत्त्यर्थं[^१७१] शस्त्रग्रहणम् । निमित्तान्तरम् आह- **आत्मनश् च परित्राणे** । परिः सर्वतोभावे । शरीरभार्याधनपुत्ररक्षार्थं **घ्नन् धर्मेण न दुष्यति** ।

**दक्षिणानां च सङ्गरो** ऽविरोधः । यदि यज्ञार्थं कल्पिता दक्षिणाः कैश्चिद् अपह्रियेरंस् तदा तन्निमित्तं योद्धव्यम् ।


<u>अन्ये</u> त्व् एवम् अभिसंबध्नन्ति । **दक्षिणानां** हेतोः **संगरे** यद्य् उपरोधः प्रवृत्तो[^१७२] धर्मे ऽप्रवृत्ते दक्षिणासंगर इति ।   
**स्त्रीविप्राणाम् अभ्यवपत्तिः** परिभवः[^१७३] । यत्र स्त्रियः साध्व्यो हठात् केनचिद् उपगम्यन्ते हन्यन्ते वा । एवं ब्राह्मणाः केनचिद् धन्यन्ते । तत्र घ्नन् खड्गादिना न दुष्यति । हिंसाप्रतिषेधातिक्रमो न कृतो भवतीत्य् अर्थः । असति प्रतिषेधे कामचारप्राप्तौ विध्यन्तरपर्यालोचनया गौतमवचनम् अनुध्यायमानेन "दुर्बलहिंसायां विमोचने शक्तश् चेत्" (ग्ध् २१.१९) इत्य् अवश्यं हनने प्रवर्तितव्यम् । अथ प्रतिहारशङ्का भवति तदा "सर्वत एवात्मानं गोपायेत्" (ग्ध् ९.३४) इत्य् उपेक्षा ॥ ८.३४८–४९ ॥



[^१७३]:
M G DK: viśeṣāṇām abhyavapattiparibhavaḥ

_आत्मपरित्राणार्थम् अविचारेण योद्धव्यम् । तद् अनुदर्शयति ।_
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

**(verses 8.348-349)**

From what has been said above ([in
4.36])
regarding the carrying of ‘a bamboo-stick’ the carrying of weapon being
permitted to a Vedic-scholar, it is just possible that when possessed of
much physical strength, if he were to take up arms, he would be regarded
as a desperado; hence for fear of his becoming a criminal, it would seem
that the carrying of weapons is forbidden to him; it is in view of this
idea that the present text sanctions the taking up or arms under certain
circumstances—‘*Twice-born persons shall carry arms*.’

This sentence ends here (as a general permission); the rest (of the two
verses) is to be taken along with —‘*if one strikes in the cause of
right*, etc., etc.’ Thus there are two distinct sentences here.

Some people hold that arms are to be taken up only under the
circumstances described hero (and hence they take the whole of the two
verses as a single sentence). But according to this view, what would he
the condition of the man who would be unexpectedly attacked by a
desperado? Certainly desperados would not wait for him to take up arms.

Another interpretation possible is that—“when religion is interfered
with, when there is confusion caused by exigencies of time, *i.e*., when
things have become unsettled on the death of a king—one may take up
arms; but at other tiroes the necessary protection would be afforded by
the king himself.”

But in reality the king cannot spread out his hands and reach every
individual person in the kingdom. There are some desperados who attack
even the boldest, and the most trusted officers of the king; but they
fear persons carrying arms.

For these reasons it is right that one should carry arms at all times.

The question arising—are arms to be carried only for the purpose of
striking fear in the minds of people?—the answer is ‘no,’—‘*if one
strikes in the cause of right, he does not incur sin*’;—*i.e*., what is
permitted extends up to *striking*.

What Āpastamba (1.10.6) has declared—‘The Brāhmaṇa shall not take up a
weapon even for the purpose of testing it’—prohibits the *raising* of
weapons, when none of the mentioned occasions is present, and not the
*carrying* of them; because weapons are unsheathed, when they are
tested.

‘*When religion is interfered with*,’— when the performance of
sacrifices and other religious rites is obstructed by some men.

‘*When there is confusion among the castes*’—absence of all restraint,
admixture of castes, and so forth.

‘*Caused by the exigencies of time*,’—such as the death of the king, and
such other calamities. On all these occasions one shall carry arms fur
the protection of his properly and family.

Others hold that on the occasions stated, arms may be carried for the
sake of other people also;—says Gautama (21.19)—‘Also when some one is
striking a weaker man, if he is able to rescue him.’

Interference with religious rites, and confusion of castes having been
already mentioned as occasions for taking up arms, the author proceeds
to mention other occasions also—‘*In his own defence*’—*i.e*., for
defending his own body, wife, children and property ,—*against all kinds
of danger*—this is what is signified by the preposition ‘*pari*’ in the
term ‘*paritrāṇe*’;—‘if one *strikes, he incurs no sin*.’

‘*In cases of hindrance of sacrificial fees*’—when other people are
taking away the sacrificial fee set up in connection with a
performance,—then one must fight, on that account.

Others construe the phrase to mean ‘when there is a strife for
sacrificial fees’;—*i.e*., if some trouble arises over them.

‘*In the case of outrage upon*’—insult, ill-treatment of,—‘*women and
Brāhmaṇas*,’—where modest women are being forcibly outraged, or killed;
or where a Brāhmaṇa is being killed by some people,—‘*if one strikes*’
with the sword or some such weapon, ‘*he incurs no sin*.’ That is, this
involves no transgression of the prohibition of causing injury to
others.

If there was no prohibition, one might do as he liked; but when we look
at other injunctions and ponder over the declaration of Gautama—‘One
should take up arms when a weaker person is being struck, if he is able
to rescue him,’—we understand that one must strike, under the
circumstances. But if one fears that he may be struck hack, then he
might ignore (what is happening to others), in accordance with the maxim
that ‘one should guard himself against all dangers.’—(348-349).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

**(verses 8.348-349)**

These verses are quoted half and half in *Aparārka* (p. 1043).

They are quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 784), which adds the following
notes :—‘*Kālakārite viplave*’, ‘if there is interference with the
sacred duties due either to the tendencies of the king or to the
tendency of the times,’—‘*tat paritrāṇe saṅgare*’, ‘if fighting ensues
for the safety of those’;—‘*abhyupapatti*’ is
‘preservation’;—‘*dharmeṇa*’, ‘not by dishonest weapons or by dishonest
methods.’

The first half of verse 348 is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.286) in support
of the view that, in certain cases—when, for instance, one finds the
paramour with his wife, and there would be delay if he were to lodge a
regular complaint before the king,—the man would be justified in taking
up a weapon and killing the paramour. *Bālambhaṭṭī* explains the entire
verse:—‘(1) When arrogant persons prevent Brāhmaṇas from performing
their sacred duties; (2) when, on the waning of royal authority due to
foreign invasion, one has to take care of himself, (3) when one has to
enter a fray for the preserving of cows &c., (4) or for the safety of
women and Brāhmaṇas;—if one fights in a lawful manner, he incurs no
sin.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.348-349)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (2.4-15).—‘They quote the following—“Out of regard for the
sacred law, the Brāhmaṇa and the Vaiśya may take up arms for the
protection of cows and Brāhmaṇas, or when a confusion of castes
threatens to take place.”’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.24).—‘The Brāhmaṇa and the Vaiśya may take up arms in
self-defence and in order to prevent the confusion of castes.’

*Gautama* (7.25).—‘If his life is threatened, even a Brāhmaṇa may use
arms.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अर्थकारितत्वाच् छस्त्रग्रहणस्य नायं विधिः । किं तर्ह्य् अर्थप्राप्तानुवादो ऽयं दण्डप्रतिषेधार्थः । क्षत्रियस्य प्रजासंरक्षणोपदेशसामर्थ्यात् प्राप्तं शस्त्रग्रहणम् । तदितरद्विजातिविषयो ऽयम् उपदेषः प्रतीयते । शस्त्रं द्विजातिभिर् ग्राह्यम् इति तद्ग्रहस्याधुना निमित्तं दर्शयति । धर्मो यत्र देशे काले वोपरुध्यते वर्णाश्रमिणाम् । इदं च सूत्रस्थानम् । अन्यद् अस्य भाष्यं भवति । द्विजातीनां च वर्णानां विप्लवे वर्णसङ्करादौ व्यवस्थाभङ्गे, कालकारिते राजव्यसनेन केनचित् कदाचिच् च धर्मोपरोधाद् अत्र शस्त्रग्रहणम् अदोषम् । यतोप् ऽस्य न तत्र साहसिकदण्डो युज्यते । किं चात्मनश् च परित्राणे परितः सर्वतस् त्राणे सकुटुम्बद्रविणस्यात्मनः दक्षिणानां चापहारपरित्राण इति वर्तते । दक्षीणाग्रहणं सर्वयाज्ञीयद्रव्योपलक्षणार्थम् । सङ्गरे युद्धे न तु छले । स्त्रीविप्राभ्यवपत्तौ च गृहीतशस्त्रः धर्मोपरोधहेतुम् उपात्तशस्त्रः घ्नन् धर्मेण न कूटयुद्धेन न दुष्यति परत्रेह च शास्त्रोपदेशसामर्थ्यात् । तल्लक्षणत्वाच् च धर्माधर्मयोर् अनतिशङ्क्यम् एतत् । स्त्रीग्रहणं च सर्वानुग्रह्याणां बालवृद्धातुराणां प्रदर्शनार्थं कार्यसामान्याद् वि[धेः], विप्रग्रहणं च सर्वश्रेयसाम् आचार्यादीनाम् इति ॥ ८.८.३४७–४८ ॥

_धर्मोपरोधे गृहीतशस्त्र आततायिनं घ्नन् धर्माण न दुष्यतीति यद् उक्तम् अस्यार्थवादः ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

349	In their own defence, in a strife for the fees of officiating priests, and in order to protect women and Brahmanas; he who (under such circumstances) kills in the cause of right, commits no sin.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/350_guruM_vA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>350 गुरुं वा ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

गुरुं वा बाल-वृद्धौ वा  
ब्राह्मणं वा बहु-श्रुतम् ।  
आततायिनम् आयान्तं  
हन्याद् एवाऽविचारयन्  ॥ ८.३५० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/350_guruM_vA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Without hesitation one should strike an approaching desperado,—be he a preceptor, a child, or an aged man, or a highly learned Brāhmaṇa.—(350)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**आततायी** उच्यते यः शरीरधनदारपुत्रनाशे सर्वप्रकारम् उद्यतः । तम् **अविचारयन्**[^१७४] हन्यात् । **गुर्व्**आदिग्रहणम् अर्थवादः । एते ऽपि हन्तव्याः, किम् उतान्य इति । एतेषां त्व् आततायित्वे ऽपि वधो नास्ति । "आचार्यं च प्रवक्तारम्" (म्ध् ४.१६२) इत्य् अनेनापकारिणाम् अपि वधो निषिद्धः । **गुरुम् आततायिनम्** इति शक्यः संबन्धः । तथा सत्य् आततायिविशेषणम् एतत् । ततो गुर्वादिव्यतिरिक्तस्याततायिनः प्रतिषेधः कुतः स्यात् । वाक्यान्तराभावात् । 


[^१७४]:
     M G add: na vicārayet; DK (1: 1625) add: na vicārayan

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अथ "नाततायिवधे दोषः" (म्ध् ८.३५१) इत्य् एतद् वाक्यान्तरं सामान्येनाभ्यनुज्ञापकम् इति ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;तद् अपि न, विधेर् अश्रवणात्, पूर्वशेषतया चार्थवादत्वे प्रकृतवचनत्वात् । 

- इह भवन्तस्[^१७५] त्व् आहुः- यद्य् आततायिनम्[^१७६] इत्य् एव विधिः, अवशिष्टो ऽर्थवादः, तथापि गुर्वादीनां वधानुज्ञानम् । यतो ऽन्यद् अपकारित्वम् अन्यद् आततायित्वम् । यो ह्य् अन्यां कांचन पीडां करोति न सर्वेण शरीरादिना सो ऽपकारी, ततस् त्व् अन्य[^१७७] आततायी[^१७८] । तथा च पठ्यते ।


[^१७८]:
     M G: karoti sa sarveṇa śarīrādinā steyakārītas tv ātatāyī; DK: 


[^१७७]:
     DK omits: anya


[^१७६]:
     M G: yad yathātatāyinam


[^१७५]:
     M G: bhavatāṃs

- उद्यतासिर् विषाग्निभ्यां शापोद्यतकरस् तथा ।

- आथर्वणेन हन्ता च पिशुनश् चापि राजतः ॥

- भार्यातिक्रमकारी च रन्धान्वेषणतत्परः ।

- एवमाद्यान् विजानीयात् सर्वान् एवाततायिनः ॥ (क्स्म् ८०२–०३)

****"**<u>आयान्तम् इति</u>** वचनाद् आत्तशस्त्रो हन्तुम् अभिधावन् दारान् वा जिहीर्षन् हन्तव्यः । कृते तु दोषे किम् अन्यत् करिष्यतीत्य् उपेक्षा" इति ब्रुवते ।

<u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । यतः "प्रकाशम् अप्रकाशं वा"[^१७९] (म्ध् ८.३५१) इति वक्ष्यति । समानौ ह्य् एतौ करिष्यन् कृतवांश् च[^१८०] । तस्माद् **आयान्तम्** इत्य् अनुवादः- कर्तुम् आगतं कृत्वा वा गतम् इति । आततायित्वाच् चासौ हन्यते । न च कृतवचन आततायित्वम् उपैति । नास्यात्मनो रक्षार्थ एव वध "आत्मनश् च परित्राणे" (म्ध् ८.३४९) इति अनेनोक्तम्[^१८१] ॥ ८.३५० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The author further points out that in one’s own defence a man should
always fight.

That man is called a ‘*desperado*’ who is intent upon destroying one’s
body, property, wife or children. Such a man one ‘*should strike without
hesitation*.’

The mention of the ‘*preceptor*’ and the rest is purely by way of a
commendatory declamation; the sense being—‘when even such persons
deserve to be struck, what of others?’ As a matter of fact, in the case
of the persons named, there is to be no killing, even though they be
desperados; since from what has been said under the text—‘He shall never
offend the teacher who explained the Veda, etc.’ (4.162)—it is clear
that the striking of the preceptor is forbidden, even if he do harm.

It may be possible to construe the term ‘*gurum*’ with
‘*ālatāyinam*’;—hut in that case the two terms would mean ‘the great
desperado’; so that the striking of desperados who are not ‘great’ would
become precluded;—why?—because there is no other text (that would enjoin
*striking* in their case).

“But there is the next verse—‘there is no sin in killing a desperado,’
which permits the killing of all desperados in general.”

Not so; because we do not find any injunctive word in the next verse,
which, on that account is best taken as a declamatory supplement to the
previous injunction (contained in the present verse).

The revered teachers have declared as follows:—Though, in reality, the
injunction contained in the text is that ‘one should strike the
desperado,’ and all the rest is merely declamatory,—yet it has to be
taken as sanctioning the striking of the preceptor and other persons
mentioned. Because the mere ‘malefactor’ (who is mentioned in 4.162, as
not to be offended) is something quite different from the
‘desperado’;—one who inflicts an ordinary injury, which does not involve
any serious harm to the body, etc., is the ‘malefactor’; while the
‘desperado’ is something totally different;—being described in the
following words.—‘Ho who has lifted the sword, who is going to strike
with poison or Are, who has raised his hands for the purpose of
pronouncing a curse, who is going to kill by means of magic spells, who
backbites against one to the king, who violates one’s wife, who is ever
intent upon finding fault with one,—all these should be regarded as
*desperados*?

Some people hold that—“from the use of the word ‘*approaching*’ in the
text it would seem that the person who is rushing forward with uplifted
sword, with a view to strike him, or one who is *going to* take away his
wife, should be struck;—but when the injury has *been done*, he should
ignore it.”

But this is not right; since in the next verse we find the phrase
‘*openly or secretly*,’ from which it is clear that the man who *has
done* the harm, and he who is *going to do it*, both stand on the same
footing. Hence the term ‘*approaching*’ must be taken as purely
descriptive; whether he ‘approaches’ *for doing harm*, or *after having
done harm*,—he is to be struck, because he is a ‘*desperado*; for the
mere fact of his *having done* the act does not deprive him of the
character of a ‘desperado.’ Further, the present text does not sanction
the *striking* in one’s own defence only (in which case alone the
above-mentioned meaning of the epithet would be applicable); since that
has been already provided for in the foregoing verse.—(350)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

“According to Kullūka the condition is that one must be unable to save
one self by fight;—according to Nārāyaṇa one must not wound such a man
excessively.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 784), which adds the
following explanation:—‘When even the Teacher and the rest, if they are
assassins, may be slain—what to say of others;’—which only means that
there is nothing wrong in the slaying of assassins other than the
Teacher and the rest; it is not meant that these latter are to be slain;
because we have the general prohibition that ‘no Brāhmaṇa shall be
killed.’

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 104);—in *Aparārka* (p. 627, and
again at p. 1043);—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī*—(p. 1011);—in
*Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 59), which says that ‘*eva*’ has been added for
the purpose of emphasis;—and in *Nītimayūkha* (p. 77).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.350-351)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.15-18). ‘They declare that the slayer commits no crime by
slaying an assassin. They quote the following:—“An incendiary, a
poisoner, one raising a weapon to strike, a robber, one who forcibly
takes away land, abductor of another man’s wife,—these six are called
Ātatāyin, *Assassins*. One may slay an assassin who comes with the
intention of killing, even though he may be knowing the whole Veda along
with the Upaniṣads; by that act one does not incur the guilt of
Brāhmaṇa-slaughter. He who slays an assassin learned in the Veda and
belonging to a noble family, does not incur, by that act, the guilt of
murdering a learned Brāhmaṇa; as this is a case of fury recoiling on
fury.”’

*Baudhāyana* (1-18.11-13).—‘One should not fight with......
Brāhmaṇas,—excepting assassins. They quote the following—“He who slays
an assassin, who is able to expound the Veda and born in a noble family,
does not, by that act, incur the guilt of killing a learned Brāhmaṇa;
this being a case of fury recoiling on fury.”’

*Viṣṇu* (5.189-192).—‘Any man may unhesitatingly slay a man who attacks
him with the intent to murder him, whether he be his spiritual teacher,
young or old, or a Brāhmaṇa, or even a Brāhmaṇa versed in many branches
of sacred knowledge. By killing an assassin who attempts to kill,
whether in public or in private, no crime is committed by the
slayer—fury recoils on fury. Assassins are of seven kinds—such as try to
kill by the sword, or with poison, or with fire, such as raise their
hand to pronounce a curse, such as recite a deadly incantation from the
Atharva Veda, such as raise a false accusation reaching the ears of the
King, and such as have illicit intercourse with another man’s wife. The
same designation is given to other evil-doers who deprive others of
their reputation or of their wealth, or who destroy religious merit by
ruining pools and such things or property.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 1042).—‘Or an assassin advancing to strike one,
even though he be fully learned in the Veda, if one strikes him, one
does not incur the sin of Brāhmaṇa-killing. The following are to be
regarded as assassins:—one raising the sword to strike, one going to
administer fire or poison, one raising his hand to curse, one killing
with magic rites, one back-biting to the King, one wresting another
man’s wife.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘If one reviles on being reviled, or strikes on being
struck, or kills one who is advancing to kill, one does not commit any
offence.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

"आचार्यं च प्रवक्तारं पितरं मातरं गुरुम्" इत्य् एवमादिभिः शास्त्रैर् अत्यन्तापकारिणो ऽप्य् एते गुर्वादयो न वध्याः इत्य् उक्तं यतः इदं पूर्वविध्यर्थव्[आदार्थम् । गु]र्वादयो ऽप्य् आततायिनो ऽनेन निमित्तेन वध्याः स्युर् अत्यन्तावध्याः सन्तः, किं पुनस् तेभ्यो ऽन्य इत्य् अतिशयार्थवादो यथा लोके ॥ ८.३४९ ॥

_तथा चेदम् आह ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

350	One may slay without hesitation an assassin who approaches (with murderous intent), whether (he be one's) teacher, a child or an aged man, or a Brahmana deeply versed in the Vedas.
</details>
</details>
</div>

  
## 351-420
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/351_nAtatAyivadhe_doSho.md">
<details open><summary><h3>351 नाततायिवधे दोषो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

नाततायिवधे दोषो  
हन्तुर् भवति कश् चन ।  
प्रकाशं वाप्रकाशं वा  
मन्युस् तं मन्युम् ऋच्छति  ॥ ८.३५१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/351_nAtatAyivadhe_doSho.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

No evil of any kind accrues to the slayer for killing a desperado, either openly or secretly; as it is only Fury recoiling upon Fury.—(361)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**न कश्चन** इति- नाधर्मो न दण्डो न प्रायश्चित्तम् इति । **प्रकाशं** जनसमक्षम्, **अप्रकाशं** विषादिदानेन येन केनचिद् उपायेन । **मन्युः** क्रोधाभिमानिदेवता, असौ **मन्युम् ऋच्छति** । नात्र हन्तृहन्तव्यभावो ऽस्ति । पुरुषयोर् अर्थ आततायिक्रोध इतरेण हन्यत इत्य् अर्थवादो ऽयं । यथा प्रतिग्रहकामः "को मह्यं ददातु, नाहं प्रतिग्रहीता, न त्वं दाता, ततश् च कुतः प्रतिग्रहदोषो माम" एवम् अत्रापि । इह साहसिके दण्डो नाम्नातः । स दण्डपारुष्ये[^१८२] द्रष्टव्यः । इह त्व् अधिकतरः, यत उक्तम् "विज्ञेयः पापकृत्तमः" (म्ध् ८.३४५) इति[^१८३] ॥ ८.३५१ ॥


[^१८३]:
     M G: pāpakṛta iti


[^१८२]:
     M G add: ca
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*No evil of any kind*’—*i.e*., no sin, no punishment, no expiatory
rites.

‘*Openly*’—in the presence of other people;—‘*secretly*’ by
administering poison, etc.;—*i.e*., by whatever means.

‘*Fury*’—the deity of anger—‘*recoils upon Fury*’;—so that there is no
relation of ‘slayer’ and ‘slain’ between the two *persons*; since it is
the desperado’s *anger* that is killed by the *anger* of the other
person.

‘This is purely declamatory; being analogous to the following speech of
the person who is seeking for gifts and says—‘Who will give to me? I am
not the *receiver*, nor you the *giver*; so that there would be nothing
wrong in the acceptance of the gift.’

In connection with the desperado mentioned in this text, the author has
not laid down any penalties that should be indicted upon him for
committing an act of violence. That has got to be found in the section
on ‘Hurt’; it is something over and above it that has been laid down
here, in view of his being the ‘worst offender’; as said above
(345).—(351)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.286) as permitting the wielding
of weapons by the Brāhmaṇas;—in *Nītimayūkha* (p. 77);—and in
*Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 60), which explains the last clause to mean that
‘the case is not that of one man killing another, but the animosity of
one man (the killer) destroying the animosity of another (the killed);’
it adds Vaśiṣṭha’s definition of the *ātatāyin*—‘one who sets fire to
houses, or administers poison, or who is going to strike with a weapon,
or who robs one of his property, or who takes forcible possession of
one’s fields, or of one’s wife,—these six are *ātatāyins*.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.350-351)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.350].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

मन्युः क्रोधो वध्यस्य, तं घातकमन्युः क्रोध ऋच्छति निवर्तयति । साहसप्रशंसार्थं चेदं श्लोकद्वयम् । तत्प्रशंसा च राजदण्डनिवृत्त्यर्था । एवं चास्यानेनाततायिवधे राजदण्डाभाववत् प्रत्यवायाभावो ऽपि गम्यते । तथा च व्यासो भीष्मजामदग्न्यरामसंवादे-



> यो हन्यात् समरे क्रुद्धो युद्ध्यन्तम् अपलायिनम् ।   
> ब्रह्महत्या न तस्यास्ति इति दर्मेषु निश्चयः ॥ इति ।

ईषत्प्रत्यवायायान्ये ऽत्रातत्यिनो गुर्वादयो ऽपि वध्या भवन्तीति शिष्टानाम् अप्य् आततायिनां वधम् इच्छन्ति । अपरे हीनाततायिवधं निर्विकल्पं मन्यन्ते, समे तु विकल्प आत्मनः परस्य वा विशिष्टे आत्मत्यागद एवाकुशलारम्भसामर्थाद् इति । तद् एतद् यथासंभवम् उक्तपरिहारं पूर्वश्लोकविवरण एवेति । साहसस्य च प्रतिषेध एवात्र श्रूयते, न तु दण्डविधिः कश्चिद्, यतः अल्पमध्यमोत्तमापराधेषु साहसिकस्य यथाक्रमं प्रथममध्यमोत्तमसाहसदण्डा एव यथापरिभाषिताः स्युः । अथ वा स्तेयसादृश्यात् साहसिके ऽपि तस्यानुक्तो ऽपि सामर्थ्यात् स्तेयदण्डविकल्पः स्याद् इति ॥ ८.३५० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

351	By killing an assassin the slayer incurs no guilt, whether (he does it) publicly or secretly; in that case fury recoils upon fury.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/352_paradArAbhimarsheShu_pravRttAn.md">
<details open><summary><h3>352 परदाराभिमर्शेषु प्रवृत्तान् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

परदाराभिमर्शेषु  
प्रवृत्तान् नॄन् महीपतिः ।  
उद्वेजनकरैर् दण्डैश्  
छिन्नयित्वा प्रवासयेत् [मेधातिथिपाठः - चिह्नयित्वा]  ॥ ८.३५२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/352_paradArAbhimarsheShu_pravRttAn.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Those men who are addicted to intercourse with the wives of other men, the king shall banish after having branded them with terror-inspiring punishments.—(352)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

विवाहसंकृतायां स्त्रियां **दार**शब्दो वर्तते । आत्मनो ऽन्यः **परः** । **अभिमर्शः** संभोग आलिङ्गनाद् अरभ्य,[^१८४] आलिङ्गनं जनद्वयसमवायः,[^१८५] भोगजन्यायाः प्रीतेः प्रवृत्तिः प्रारम्भस् तन्निवृत्त्यर्थं दूतीसंप्रेषणादिना प्रोत्साहनम् । अथ च संग्रहणम् अभिमर्शनं प्रचक्षते । तेनायम् अर्थः-[^१८६] परभार्यागमने **प्रवृत्तं** पुरुषं ज्ञात्व्**ओद्वेजनकरैस्** तीक्ष्णाग्रैः शक्तिशूलादिभिर् अङ्कयित्वा नासाछेदादिभिर् **विवासयेत्** । सर्वत्रात्र विशेषदण्डस्योक्तत्वाद् अस्य विषयभावो न सामान्यदण्डो ऽयम् । किं तर्हि, पुनः पुनः प्रवृत्तौ । इदं तु युक्तम् । अलभमानस्य[^१८७] विषयान्तरं प्रवासस्य धनदण्डस्य च कार्यभेदात् समुच्चयः । तथा दर्शयिष्यामः ॥ ८.३५२ ॥


[^१८७]:
     M G DK: alabhyamānasya


[^१८६]:
     M G: yam arthaṃ; DK (1: 1856): ayam arthaḥ (all omit tena)


[^१८५]:
     M G: -samavāya-


[^१८४]:
     M G: āliṅganārabhya; J: āliṅganādiḥ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*wife*’ is applied to the woman who has gone through the
sacrament of marriage.

Persons other than one’s own self are called ‘*others*.’

‘*Intercourse*’ here stands for *carnal enjoyment*, consisting in
embracing and other acts. ‘Embracing’—consisting in the two parties
coming together in close contact,—the cultivating of the feeling of
pleasure caused by mutual union,—the sending of messengers and so
forth,—and the actual sexual act,—all these are included under the term
‘*abhimarṣa*,’ ‘*intercourse*.’

The meaning thus comes to be this:—When the king finds that a certain
man is addicted to having intercourse with the wife of another
person,—he should ‘brand’ him,—by cutting off his nose, for instance,—by
means of ‘*terror-inspiring*’—sharp-edged weapons,—and then ‘*banish*’
him.

In as much as penalties in connection with each detailed act hare been
laid down elsewhere, the present verse should be taken as referring, not
to a single act, but to repeated acts; and the right thing appears to be
that the ‘banishment’ here prescribed,—which is not applicable to any
other act—has to be inflicted along with a fine in money, the purpose
served by which is wholly different. All this we shall explain later
on.—(352).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 853);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p.
388);—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 174), which explains ‘*trīn*’ (which
is its reading for ‘*nṛṛn* ( *nṝn*?)’) as ‘persons of the three lower
castes, *i.e*., all except the Brāhmaṇas,’—and ‘*udvejanakaraiḥ*’ as the
‘cutting of the ears, nose, and so forth.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.352-353)  
**

*Nārada* (14.6).—‘Indecent assault on another man’s wife is called
violence of the highest order.’

*Nārada* (12.60).—‘When a man meets a woman at a house other than her
own, it is held to be *Adultery*.’

*Nārada* (12.77).—‘Let punishment be inflicted by the King on him who
has intercourse with a woman intercourse with whom has been forbidden;
and let such sinners be purified by performing penances.’

*Bṛhaspati* (23.9).—‘For the three grades of adultery, the first,
middling and highest fines shall be inflicted respectively; it may be
higher in the case of rich men.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 388).—‘All men should adhere
strictly to their own wives and to their own functions;—by whatever limb
one commits an offence, that limb shall be cut off, or a fine of 8,000
shall be inflicted.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

_अधुना द्रमप्राप्तं स्त्रीसंग्रहणम् उच्यते ।_

ये तु बहुशो ऽपि वार्यमाणा नावतिष्ठेरन् तत्र तेषाम् अयं प्रवासनविधि सचिह्नः । तथा चोक्तम् अपराधसमुच्चये- "वाग्दण्डं प्रथमं कुर्यात्" इत्य् एवमादि ॥ ८.३५१ ॥

_यस्मात्_ ।
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

352	Men who commit adultery with the wives of others, the king shall cause to be marked by punishments which cause terror, and afterwards banish.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/353_tat-samuttho_hi.md">
<details open><summary><h3>353 तत्-समुत्थो हि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

तत्-समुत्थो हि लोकस्य  
जायते वर्णसंकरः ।  
येन मूलहरो ऽधर्मः  
सर्वनाशाय कल्पते  ॥ ८.३५३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/353_tat-samuttho_hi.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For out of that arises the admixture of castes among people;—whence follows root-rending unrighteousness, tending to total destruction.—(353)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**समुत्थानम्** उत्पत्तिः । ततः परदारागमनात् **संकरो** ऽवान्तरवर्णरूपो **जायते** । येन जातेन्**आधर्मो** मूलस्य लोकस्य दिवः पतिता वृष्टिस् तां हरत् **अधर्मः** । धर्मे हि सति "आदित्याज् जायते वृष्टिः" (म्ध् ३.६६) । न च संकरे सत्य् अपि कारीरीयागो नापि पात्रे दानम् अतो दानयागहोमानां सस्योत्पत्तिहेतुभूतानाम् अभावात् सर्वजगन्नाशसमर्थो भवति । तस्मात् पारदारिकान्, "अधर्ममूलवर्णसंकरः[^१८८] स्यात्" इति सस्यादिनिष्पत्तिमूलां वा वृष्टिं रक्षन्, प्रवासयेत् ॥ ८.३५३ ॥


[^१८८]:
     M G: pāradārikādharma-; J: -mūlaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Arising*’ means *coming into existence*, ‘*out of that*’—*i.e*., from
the act of having intercourse with the wives of other men,—there
arises—‘*admixture of castes*’—in the form of
‘half-castes’;—‘*whence*’—*i.e*., on account of whoso coming into
existence,—‘*follows unrighteousness*,’ which ‘*rends*’—destroys—the
very ‘*root*’— of the people,—in the form of rain from heaven. It is
only when righteousness prevails that rain proceeds from the sun. When,
on the other hand, the world becomes full of ‘half-castes,’ such
righteous acts as the *Rārlri* sacrifice or gifts to proper men and the
like cease to be performed; thus there being absence of gifts,
sacrifices, oblations and the like,—which form the source out of which
all corn is produced,—the said unrighteousness becomes capable of
bringing ruin to the entire world.

For this reason, taking into consideration the fact that the act would
be productive of ‘half-castes,’ and with a view to safeguard the supply
of rain necessary for corns and other things,—tho king should always
banish adulterers.—(353)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 388);—and in *Aparārka*
(p. 854).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.352-353)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.352].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

परदारिकनिग्रहप्रशंसार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.३५२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

353	For by (adultery) is caused a mixture of the castes (varna) among men; thence (follows) sin, which cuts up even the roots and causes the destruction of everything.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/354_parasya_patnyA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>354 परस्य पत्न्या ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

परस्य पत्न्या पुरुषः  
संभाषां योजयन् रहः ।  
पूर्वम् आक्षारितो दोषैः  
प्राप्नुयात् पूर्वसाहसम्  ॥ ८.३५४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/354_parasya_patnyA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A man who engages in secret conversation with the wife of another person,—if he is one who has been previously accused of similar offences,—should receive the penalty of the ‘first amercement.’—(354)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**संभाषः** संभाषणम्, तम् आलापं **योजयन्** कुर्वन्[^१८९] संग्रहणादिदोषैः तत्स्त्रीप्रार्थनादिभिः[^१९०] पूर्वम् **आक्षारितो** ऽभिशस्तः, "अयम् एनाम् उपजपति" इत्य् अमुत्र दृष्टदोषः शङ्क्यमानदोषो वा चपलः, रहः उद्वातादौ निषिद्धसंभाषण इति <u>केचित्</u> [^१९१]। कारणाद् अप्य् अन्यपत्न्या संभाषणं कुर्वन् **प्रथमसाहसं** दण्डं **प्राप्नुयाद्** दापयितव्य इत्य् अर्थः ॥ ८.३५४ ॥


[^१९१]:
     M G: ākṣārito 'bhisaṃbhavām eva patnyā tasyāmutrādṛṣṭadoṣaḥ capala udvātādau niṣiddhasaṃbhāṣaṇa iti kecit


[^१९०]:
     M G: saṃgrahaṇād doṣe tatstrīprārthanād iti


[^१८९]:
     M G: tam ālapituṃ kurvan; DK: tatstriyā ālāpaṃ kurvan
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Conversation*’—talking; one who is found to be doing this;—if he
happens to be one who has been ‘*previously accused of*’—blamed for
committing—‘*such offences*’—of having a love-intrigue with that
woman,—*i.e*., if the man is of unsteady character, and has been already
seen to be carrying on an intrigue with her,—or has been suspected of
doing so;—‘*secretly*,’—in some secret place, or (as some people
explain) in a place where such conversation is forbidden;—in the case of
such a person, even if the conversation held with another’s wife be one
bearing upon some business, be should be made to pay the ‘*first
amercement*.’—(354)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 854);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p.
384), which addṣ the following notes:—‘*Pūrvamakṣāritaḥ*’, already
previously suspected of entertaining longings for that lady;—the
punishment is to be inflicted only in a case where the conversation is
not held under circumstances unfavourable to intercourse;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 156a), which explains ‘*doṣaiḥ*’ as
‘tendency to run after women,’ and adds that this refers to cases where
the conversation is held with evil intentions.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 106), as laying down the penalty
for a man of wicked character holding conversation with another man’s
wife;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 172), which explains the meaning to
be that ‘if a man who has been once suspected of illicit connection with
a woman should meet her in private and talk to her longer than ordinary
courtesy demands, he should be punished with the first amercement.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.354-355)**

*Āpastamba* (2-26.18-19).—‘A young man who, decked with ornaments,
enters unintentionally a place where a married woman or a maiden sits,
must be reprimanded;—if he does it intentionally, with an evil purpose,
ho must he fined.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.284).—‘If a man converses with a woman at improper
times or places,—or if he sits with her on the same seat,—this is
*Adultery* .’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.285).—‘If a man converses with a woman who has been
previously forbidden to do so, the woman shall pay a fine of one hundred
and the man of two hundred;—if both have been previously forbidden, the
punishment shall be the same as in the case of Adultery.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 854).—‘Conversing with a woman at improper times
or places, or in a forest,—winking at her and smiling at her,—these
constitute the first degree of Adultery.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Aparārka, p. 855).—[(See under
CCCLII-CCCLIII.)]

*Nārada* (12-62).—‘To meet another man’s wife at an unreasonable hour or
place, and to sit, converse or dally with her,—these are the three
grades of Adultery.’

*Bṛhaspati* (23.7).—‘Sending perfumes, garlands, fruits, wine, food or
clothes,—and conversing with her in secret,—is considered an adulterous
act of the second degree.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

आक्षारितः आशङ्क्यमानदोषः । संव्यवहारार्थम् अपि न संभाषेत ॥ ८.३५३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

354	A man formerly accused of (such) offences, who secretly converses with another man's wife, shall pay the first (or lowest) amercement.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/355_yas_tv.md">
<details open><summary><h3>355 यस् त्व् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यस् त्व् अनाक्षारितः पूर्वम्  
अभिभाषते कारणात् ।  
न दोषं प्राप्नुयात् किं चिन्  
न हि तस्य व्यतिक्रमः  ॥ ८.३५५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/355_yas_tv.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If, however, he is one who has not been previously accused, and converses with her for some good reason, he does not incur any guilt; as in his case there has been no transgression.—(355)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वस्य प्रत्युदाहरणम् एतत् । **अनाक्षारितो** ऽप्य् अकारणात् संभाषयन् मिश्रयन् पूर्वदण्डभाक् ॥ ८.३५५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If however the man is one who has not been previously accused or
suspected, and if the conversation is found to be one bearing upon
business, then there is no guilt, as in his case there is no
transgression.

But even though not previously accused, if he converses without any
business, he becomes liable to the aforesaid punishment.—(355)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 384), to the effect that
no blame is to be attached to, and no punishment inflicted in a case
where a man, not previously suspected, engages in such conversation for
other purposes;—in *Aparārka*, (p. 854), which explains ‘*doṣaiḥ*’
(which is its reading for ‘*pūrvam*’) as ‘such improper tendencies as a
longing for a particular woman and so forth’;—and in *Mitākṣarā*
(2.284), to the same effect.

*Bālambhaṭṭī* supplies a full explanation:—‘If the man is one who has
not been suspected of entertaining any improper desire towards a woman,
and he engages in conversation with that woman for some purpose, and in
the presence of other persons, then he should not be regarded as
culpable, since he has done nothing wrong.’

It is quoted in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (pp. 172-173) which has the same
explanation as the one just stated.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.354-355)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.354].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

संव्यवहारार्थं प्रकाशसंभाषणम् अनाशङ्क्यमानस्याभ्यनुज्ञाते (?) ॥ ८.३५४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

355	But a man, not before accused, who (thus) speaks with (a woman) for some (reasonable) cause, shall not incur any guilt, since in him there is no transgression.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/356_parastriyaM_yo.md">
<details open><summary><h3>356 परस्त्रियं यो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

परस्त्रियं यो ऽभिवदेत्  
तीर्थे ऽरण्ये वने ऽपि वा ।  
नदीनां वापि संभेदे  
स संग्रहणम् आप्नुयात्  ॥ ८.३५६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/356_parastriyaM_yo.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He who converses with ‘another’s woman’ at a watering place, or in a wilderness, or in a forest, or at the confluence of rivers,—incurs the guilt of ‘adultery.’—(356)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

"परस्य पत्न्या" (म्ध् ८.३५४) इति प्रकृते पुनः **परस्त्री**ग्रहणं मातृभगिनीगुरुपत्न्यादीनाम् अप्रतिषेधार्थम् । न हि ताः सत्य् अपि परसंबन्धित्वे परस्त्रीव्यपदेश्याः । 

**तीर्थम्** उच्यते येन मार्गेण नदीतडागादिभ्यो जलम् आनेतुम् अवतरन्ति । स हि विजनप्रायो भवति । नानुदकार्थेन तत्र संनिधीयते । सङ्केतस्थानं तादृशम् अत्र कल्पितायाम् अवश्यम् एव गन्तव्यम् अहम् अपि संनिधीयमानो नाशङ्क्यो भविष्यामीति उदकार्थी दिवा शौचाचारं वा करिष्यन् प्रतिपालयन्न् इति[^१९२] जना मंस्यन्ते । प्रदेशान्तरे तु किम् अत्रायं प्रतिपालयन्तीति शङ्का स्यात् । अतस् तीर्थे प्रतिषेधः । **अरण्यं** हि ग्रामाद् विजनो देशो गुल्मवृक्षलतादिगहनः । वने वृक्षसंततौ[^१९३] । **नदीनां संभेदः** समागमः । सो ऽपि हि सङ्केतस्थानम् । **स संग्रहणं**[^१९४] **प्राप्नुयात्** । परस्त्रीकामत्वं **संग्रहणम्** । अतश् च यस् तत्र दण्डः सो ऽस्य स्याद् इत्य् उक्तं भवति । अनाक्षारितस्यपि सत्य् अपि कारणे ऽयं प्रतिषेधः । यत् त्व् आपस्तम्बेनोक्तम् "नासंभाष्य स्त्रियम् अतिव्रजेत्" इति, तद् अन्येषु संनिहितेष्व् एतच्छास्त्रज्ञेषु प्रकाशे[^१९५] "भगिनी नमस् ते" इत्याद्यभिवादनम् अविलम्बमानेन कर्तव्यम् ॥ ८.३५६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Though ‘the wife of another man’ has been already mentioned as forming
the subject-matter of this suction, the verse contains the term
‘*another’s woman*,’ with a view to indicate that the prohibition does
not apply to one’s own mother or sister or preceptor’s wife or other
relations; for though these also are included within the category of
‘the wife of another person,’ yet they are not called ‘another’s woman.’

‘*Tīrtha*,’ ‘watering place,’ is that place where people go for the
purpose of fetching water from rivers, tanks and other reservoirs. Such
a place is generally deserted; as none except one desiring water goes
near the place; and as a rule it is places like this that are appointed
rendezvous for lovers’ meetings,—the understanding being ‘come to such
and such a place, where I shall come without being suspected of anything
wrong; as people will think that I have been waiting here for getting
water or for the purpose of performing my ablutions, etc., while if I
were to go to another place, people would suspect why I was waiting
there.’ It is for this reason that conversation at watering-places has
been forbidden.

‘*In a wilderness*’—a deserted spot outside the village; or one that is
surrounded by hedges, thickets, trees and creepers.

‘*Forest*’—cluster of trees.

‘*Confluence of rivers*’—the place where they meet. This also is a place
that is generally appointed rendezvous for lovers.

‘*He incurs the guilt of adultery*’;—‘adultery’ consists in *making love
to other people’s wives*.

*For* this reason, the punishment in this case shall be the same as in
that of ‘adultery.’ This is what is meant.

This prohibition is applicable also to one who has not been previously
accused, as also to one who converses on business.

What Āpastamba has declared that—‘One should not pass over *a woman
without accosting her*,’— refers to places where other people are
present; and to one of open accosting in the proper form,—such as ‘O
sister, I salute thee’ and what is meant is that such salutation should
be offered without delay.—(356)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 1002);—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 173), to the effect that, even though not
suspected, if one converses with a woman in secluded places, he is
guilty of an offence.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (12.63).—‘When a woman and a man have meetings at the
confluence of two rivers, at a bathing place, in a garden, or in a
park,—this also is called *Adultery*.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

तीर्थादिषु विजनेषु कारणाद् अप्य् अभिभाषमाणः **संग्रहणम् आप्नुयाद्** अनाक्षारितो ऽपि पूर्वम् ॥ ८.३५५ ॥

_किं च ¦_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

356	He who addresses the wife of another man at a Tirtha, outside the village, in a forest, or at the confluence of rivers, suffer (the punishment for) adulterous acts (samgrahana).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/357_upachArakriyA_keliH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>357 उपचारक्रिया केलिः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

उपचारक्रिया केलिः  
स्पर्शो भूषण-वाससाम् [मेधातिथिपाठः - उपकारक्रिया] ।  
सह खट्वासनं चैव  
सर्वं संग्रहणं स्मृतम्  ॥ ८.३५७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/357_upachArakriyA_keliH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Offering help, flirting, touching of ornaments and clothes, sitting on the same bed,—all this has been declared to be ‘adultery.’—(357)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

या न केनचित् संबन्धेन संबन्धिनी तस्या वस्त्रमाल्यादिदानेन **उपकार**करणम् । तथा भोजनपानादिना । **केलिः** परिहासो वक्रभणितादिना । **स्पर्शो भूषणवाससाम्**[^१९७] । **भूषणं** हारकटकादि तदङ्गलग्नम्, तदीयम् एतद् वेति ज्ञात्वा विनाप्रयोजनेनान्यगृहीतम् अपि स्पृश्यते । एकस्यां खट्वायाम् असंसक्ताङ्गयोर् अपि सहासनम् । सर्वम् एतत् तुल्यदण्डम् ॥ ८.३५७ ॥


[^१९७]:
     M G omit: yā na kenacit . . . sparśo bhūṣaṇavāsasām
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ‘*offering of help*,’— in the shape of clothes, garlands, or
articles of food and drink and other things,—to a lady who is not
related to one in any way.

‘*Flirting*’—joking in ambiguous words, etc.

‘*Ornaments*,’— the necklace, the bracelet and so forth, either when all
this is actually on her body, or even when held by others, if he touches
them, without reason, simply because they belong to that particular
lady.

‘*Sitting on the same bed*,’—oven without actually touching. All this
makes him liable to the same punishment.—(357)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 381), which explains
‘*upakārakriyā*’ as ‘behaving agreeably,’—and ‘*keli*’ as ‘flirtation.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.357-358)**

*Nārada* (12.65-66).—‘If one touches a woman where she should not be
touched, or allows himself to be similarly touched,—all such acts, done
with mutual consent are declared to be Adultery. Bestowing attentions on
a woman, sporting with her, touching her ornaments or clothes, sitting
with her on the same bed,—all such acts are declared to be adulterous.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 175).—‘Catching hold of each other’s hair is
Adultery.’

*Bṛhaspati* (23.6-8).—‘Winking at a woman, smiling at her, sending
go-betweens to her, touching her ornaments or clothes,—is called
Adultery of the first degree. Sending perfumes, garlands, fruits, wine,
food or clothes, and conversing with her in secret, are regarded to be
adulterous acts of the second degree. Sitting on the same bed, dallying,
kissing or embracing each other,—is defined as Adultery of the highest
degree.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.254).—‘Touching of the cloth-knot, the cover over her
breast, or of her thighs or hair, conversing with her at improper times
and places, and sitting with her on the same bed—(all this is
Adultery).’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 855).—(Reproduces Manu CCCLVII.)

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 380).—‘Sending such presents as perfumes and
garlands, incense, ornaments and clothes, and tempting her with foods
and drinks,—all this they regard as Adultery of the middle degree.
Sitting close to each other on the same couch or seat, and catching hold
of each other’s hair,—this should be regarded as Adultery of the worst
degree.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 382).—‘Whatever acts a man does with
the intention of having intercourse with a woman, all such are declared
to he reprehensible, as being conducive to the fulfilment of illicit
love. If a man sends presents to the woman, or meets her at unreasonable
hours and improper places, or touches her neck or hair or clothes, ears,
nose, hands or other parts of the body,—if he sits with her and dines
with her on the same seat,—all this has been declared by the sages to be
Adultery. All such acts as sending presents of perfumes, garlands and
clothes, and sending letters to her, should be regarded as indicative of
Adultery.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**भूषणवाससाम्** उपदेशात् स्त्रीगतानां पुरुषगतानां च स्पर्शनाद् उभयापराधः । यच् चान्यत् स्निग्धदृष्टिनिपातनाङ्गविकारादि तद् अपि संग्रहणम् एव विज्ञेयम् ॥ ८.३५६ ॥

_इदं चान्यत् ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

357	Offering presents (to a woman), romping (with her), touching her ornaments and dress, sitting with her on a bed, all (these acts) are considered adulterous acts (samgrahana).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/358_striyaM_spRshed.md">
<details open><summary><h3>358 स्त्रियं स्पृशेद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

स्त्रियं स्पृशेद् अदेशे यः  
स्पृष्टो वा मर्षयेत् तया ।  
परस्परस्याऽनुमते  
सर्वं संग्रहणं स्मृतम्  ॥ ८.३५८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/358_striyaM_spRshed.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If one touches a woman in an improper place, or condones it when touched by her,—all this, when done with mutual consent, has been declared to be ‘adultery’—(358)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अदेशस्पर्शस् तु[^१९८] यत्र विनैव तत्स्पर्शनं गमनागमनादि संसिध्यति । महाजनसंकुले न दोषः । तथा[^१९९] शरीरावयवो ऽपि देशः । तत्र हस्तस्कन्धधृतभाण्डावरोपणे[^२००] तत्स्पर्शे न दोषः । ओष्ठचिबुकस्तनादिषु दोषः । तया वा स्तनादिस्पर्षेनोत्पीडितो यदि तत् सहते[^२०१] "भवति[^२०२] मा[^२०३] कार्षीः" इत्यादिना न[^२०४] प्रतिषेधति । **परस्परस्यानुमते** मतिपूर्वम् एतस्मिन्न् अकृते न दोषो ऽयम् । न पुनः कर्मादौ । स्खलन्ती[^२०५] पुरुषं कण्ठे ऽवलंबते, पुरुषो वा स्तनान्तरे स्त्रियम्, तद्धस्तगृहीतद्रव्यादानप्रवृत्तौ,[^२०६] शुष्के[^२०७] पतिष्यामीति कर्द्दमे पततीतिवत्, ताव् अपि न दुष्येताम्[^२०८] ॥ ८.३५८ ॥


[^२०८]:
     M G: patatīti nivedanasyāpi na duṣyatām


[^२०७]:
     M G: śulke


[^२०६]:
     M G: -pravṛttā-; DK: -pravṛttaḥ


[^२०५]:
     M G: khalaṃ; DK: tatra khalu


[^२०४]:
     M G omit: na


[^२०३]:
     M G: na


[^२०२]:
     M G: bhaven; J omits: bhavati


[^२०१]:
     M G: yadi kas tat sahate; DK: yadi kaścit sahate 


[^२००]:
     M G DK: h-skaṃdhaspṛṣṭabhāṇḍā-


[^१९९]:
     M G: yathā


[^१९८]:
     M G: pradeśasparśasya; J: adeśasparśasya
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Improper place*,’ for touching, would he one where the man could pass
along without touching the woman; there would he no harm in large
crowds.

Or ‘*place*’ may stand f or *part of the body*. There can be no wrong in
the man happening to touch the hands, or the shoulder, or the back, when
taking down a load from her head: whereas it would be very wrong to
touch her lips or chin or breasts and such other parts.

Or, when touched by her, pressed with her breasts for instance, if the
man does not resent it, by saying ‘do not do this.’

‘*By mutual consent*’;—the act is wrong only when done intentionally;
and not if he touches her during sacrificial and other
performances,—when, for instance, the woman hangs by the neck of the
man, or when the man touches the woman between her breasts, or when he
touches her when taking something from her hands and so forth. This
being due to chance,—just like the case where one desiring to fall back
upon dry ground, falls in mud,—the parties incur no guilt at all.—(358)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.357-358)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.357].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सर्व एवैते संग्रहणे समावेदितव्याः यथोक्ताः परार्थाः स्त्रियश् चतुर्मात्रैः श्लोकैः, न तु संग्रहणम् एव च । यतो नैषां संग्रहणसमो दण्डः स्यात् । तदुक्तं अपराधं परिज्ञायेति । अथ तु सर्वेष्व् एतेषु संग्रहणदण्डः कल्प्यते, संपूर्णे किं करिष्यति, न विषमसमीकरणं न्याय्यम् ॥ ८.३५७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

358	If one touches a woman in a place (which ought) not (to be touched) or allows (oneself to be touched in such a spot), all (such acts done) with mutual consent are declared (to be) adulterous (samgrahana).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/359_abrAhmaNaH_sangrahaNe.md">
<details open><summary><h3>359 अब्राह्मणः सङ्ग्रहणे ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अब्राह्मणः संग्रहणे  
प्राणान्तं दण्डम् अर्हति ।  
चतुर्णाम् अपि वर्णानां  
दारा रक्ष्यतमाः सदा  ॥ ८.३५९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/359_abrAhmaNaH_sangrahaNe.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In a case of adultery, a non-Brāhmaṇa deserves the penalty ending in death; as the wives of all the four castes are always the most deserving of protection.—(359)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तं संग्रहस्वरूपम् । दण्ड इदानीम् अत्रोच्यते । **अब्राह्मणः** क्षत्रियादिः[^२०९] **संग्रहणे** कृते **चतुर्णाम् अपि वर्णानां** हीनोत्तमजातिभेदम् अनपेक्ष्य **प्राणान्तं** प्राणत्याजने मारणे पर्यवसितं **दण्डम् अर्हति** । 


[^२०९]:
     M G: kṣatriyādi-

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कथं पुनर् ब्राह्मण्याम् शूद्रायां च संगृहीतस्य समो दण्डः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अत्र हेतुस्वरूपम् अर्थम् आह- **दारा रक्ष्यतमाः सदा** । सर्वस्य कस्यचिद् राज्ञा दारा धनशरीरेभ्यो ऽतिशयेन रक्ष्याः । तुल्ये हि सङ्करे शूद्रस्यापि कुलनाशः । एतद् उक्तं भवति । वाचनिको ऽयम् अर्थो ऽत्र हेतुर् वक्तव्यः, उक्तो[^२१०] ऽसौ ।


[^२१०]:
     M G: ko

- अत्र पूर्वे व्याचख्युः । न सर्वस्मिन् संग्रहणे प्रागुक्तदण्डो ऽयम् । किं तर्हि, मुख्ये स्पर्शविसेषे जन्यप्रीतिविशेषात्मके गमने । कथं हि तीर्थादिष्व् अभिवदनं[^२११] गमनं च समदण्डाव् उपपद्येयाताम्[^२१२] । तस्माद् अब्राह्मणः शूद्रो द्विजातिमगने प्राणच्छेदार्हो[^२१३] नान्यः । न हि विषमसमीकरणं न्याय्यम् । अतश् च[^२१४] प्रागुक्तेषु संग्रहणेष्व् अनुबन्धाद्यपेक्षया दण्डः कल्प्यः । यत्रैवं निश्चितं गमनार्थ एवायम् उपकारक्रियादिरूपक्रमस्[^२१५] तत्र मुख्यदण्ड एव युक्तः । न ह्य् अत्र वैषम्यम् अस्ति । दृष्टं चैतद् उभयत्रापीति[^२१६] । 


[^२१६]:
     M G DK (1: 1857): caitad apy ahatvāpīti


[^२१५]:
     M G: upakāraḥ kriyā-


[^२१४]:
     M G: ataḥ sva-


[^२१३]:
     M G: śūdro 'dhijātimagane brāhmaṇe chedārho


[^२१२]:
     M G: samadaṇḍāt tūpapadyeyātām


[^२११]:
     M G: api vadanaṃ; 

- तथेदम् उक्तम् "यद्य् अत्रायं दण्डो मुख्ये संग्रहणे किं करिष्यति" इति । 

- नैवान्यन् मुख्यसंग्रहणम् अस्ति । न ह्य् अस्य लौकिकः पदार्थो ऽवधृतो येन परदारोपकारादौ[^२१७] प्रयुक्त इत्येवम् अस्यैव । यं च भवन्[^२१८] मुख्यं संग्रहणं मन्यते तत्र महान् दण्डः । 


[^२१८]:
     M G: asyaivāyaṃ cābhavan


[^२१७]:
     M G: paraś ca dasyvanukārādau; DK: parasya dāropakārādau

- प्रतिषिद्धं परस्त्रीगमनं शास्त्रपर्यनुयोज्यम्[^२१९] इति चेत्, 


[^२१९]:
     J: śāstraṃ parya-

- उपकारादाव् अपि प्रतिषेधं विद्धि[^२२०] । 


[^२२०]:
     M G: pratiṣedhavat

- प्रतिषेधवद् धि प्रायश्चित्तम् अपि तुल्यं प्रसक्तम्[^२२१] इति चेत्, 


[^२२१]:
     M G DK: tulyaprasaktam

- का नामेयम् अनिष्टापत्तिः । किं तु प्रसज्येत यदा संग्रहणशब्देन तद् उच्येत[^२२२] । सिक्ते हि रेतसि गमनाद्यभिधानम्[^२२३] । यत्र यादृशो दण्डस् तत्र तत्समानं दुःखं प्राप्तम् । अतो ऽस्मिन् विपर्यये रेतःसेकनिमित्तं प्रायश्चित्तं[^२२४] तच्छब्देनाभिधानात् उपकारादौ[^२२५] कल्प्यम् । यदि च संलापादौ स्वल्पो दण्डः स्यात् तदा प्रवर्तेरन् । ततश् च परस्त्रीसंलापादिभूतेनान्येनाभिभवता[^२२६] व्यादीपितमन्मथा स्मरशराकृष्यमाणाः शरीरनिरपेक्षा राजनिग्रहं न गणेयेयुः । आद्यायाम् एव तु प्रवृत्तौ[^२२७] गृह्यमाणेष्व् अप्रबन्धवृत्तौ रागे शक्यं निराकरणम् । तस्मात् परस्त्रीम् उपजापताम् एव महादण्डो युक्तः । 


[^२२७]:
     M G: rājyāpohyānām eva tu nivṛttau


[^२२६]:
     M G: tatparastrīsaṃlāpādibhūtenānyenābhivasatā; DK: parastrīsaṃlāpādibhiḥ


[^२२५]:
     M G: upakārādibhir ādau


[^२२४]:
     M G DK omit: prāyaścittaṃ


[^२२३]:
     M G: gandhenādyabhidhānaṃ; DK: tacchedenābhidhānaṃ


[^२२२]:
     M G: ucyate

इह त्व् **अन्त**ग्रहणाद् आदिभूतेनान्येन दण्डेन भवितव्यम् । न ह्य् असत्यवादवन्तो भवन्ति । प्राणो ऽन्तो यस्य **प्राणान्तस्** तावत् पातयितव्यो यावत् प्राणेषु पतति । तेन सर्वस्वग्रहणाङ्गछेदाद्य्[^२२८] अप्य् उक्तं भवति । एकैकस्य च दण्डत्वम् अन्यत्र ज्ञातं न[^२२९] समुदाये दण्ड्यते इति बहुदण्डेष्व् आम्नातेषु स महान् यो द्विजातिस्त्रीसंग्रहणे[^२३०] ऽब्राह्मणस्य । अतो[^२३१] युक्तैव कल्पना, न[^२३२] सर्वत्र । तत्र कुलस्त्रीभिर् अनिच्छन्तीभिर् भतृमतीभिः[^२३३] संगृह्यमाणस्य प्राणापहरणं हीनजातीयाभिर् अपि[^२३४] ॥ ८.३५९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The nature of ‘adultery’ has been defined. Penalties for it are now laid
down.

‘*A non-Brāhamaṇa*’—the *Kṣatriya* and other castes.

‘*In cases of adultery*’—when adultery has been committed. ‘*Of* *all
four castes*’—irrespectively of the high or low caste of the woman
concerned.

‘*Penalty of death*’—the punishment consisting in striking till death is
brought about.

“How is it that the same penalty applies to the case of adultery with a
*Brāhmaṇa* as well as a *Śūdra* woman?”

The text adds the next sentence by way of answer to this question—‘*For
the wives of all castes are the most deserving of protection*.’
Whosoever’s wife she may be, she needs to be guarded much more carefully
than one’s body and property. Since the ‘admixture of castes’ is the
same in both cases, the family of the *Śūdra* is ruined by it, just as
much as that of the Brāhmaṇa.

What is meant by the question is this—“what is found here is a mere
assertion; some reason for this should be explained; now what is this
reason?”

In answer to this the ancients have offered the following
explanation:—The penalty here prescribed is not meant to apply to all
forms of ‘adultery,’ but only to that which consists in the chief form
of it, consisting in the actual intercourse, which consists in obtaining
a sensual pleasure by a particular form of contact. How could the same
penalty be inflicted in the case of actual sexual intercourse, as also
in that ‘conversing at a watering-place’ and such places (which also has
been declared to be a form of ‘adultery’)? Hence the conclusion is that
the death-penalty is to be inflicted only in the case of a
‘*non-Brāhmaṇa*’—*i.e*., a *Śūdra*—committing adultery with a woman of
the twice-born castes,—and not in the case of any other person. For it
cannot be right to make equal things that are *not* equal. Hence in the
case of the forms of ‘adultery’ described above, the exact penalty has
to be determined by the circumstances attending each individual case.
For instance, if in a certain case it be found for certain that the
‘offering of help’ and other approaches were made solely with a view to
actual sexual intercourse, the right penalty would be the extreme one of
death; as the case would not stand upon a different footing; as in both
cases the real motive is found to be the same.

It has teen asked—“if the extreme penalty is to be inflicted in the
ordinary forms of ‘adultery,’ what would it be in the case of real
‘adultery’?”

But ‘real adultery’ is not something different. The denotation of the
term is not to be fixed by ordinary parlance; hence it cannot be right
to argue that the extreme penalty is to be inflicted in a case where
there is an act which your august self is pleased to call ‘real
adultery.’

“Adultery with women has been forbidden; hence the question as to how
the same punishment is to be meted out in all cases of it should he
addressed to the scriptures.”

But there is similar prohibition regarding the ‘offering of help’ and
such other acts also.

“Well, in that case, it would follow that in all cases the same
expiatory rite would have to be performed.”

Why should this be regarded as an undesirable contingency? The
contingency would certainly arise if the act concerned were spoken of as
‘adultery.’ Though in reality the term is applied only to a case where
there has been emission of semen, yet punishments are meant to be
deterrent, by reason of their causing pain; hence in the case of such
acts as the ‘offering of help’ and the rest, penalty equal to that in
the case of actual intercourse has to be inflicted, on the ground that
if such acts as ‘conversation’ and the rest were associated with small
punishments, then men would he tempted to repeat them; and by frequent
conversations with women, their passion would become whetted; so that
falling a prey to the arrows of Cupid, they would not mind the small
punishments inflicted by the king, and would commit the act even at the
risk of their lives. On the other hand, if at the very first approach,
the man is met by a severely deterrent punishment, the little acts would
not be repeated, and the real act might he averted.

It is for this reason that it has been considered right to inflict a
severe punishment upon those who may just begin to make approaches to
the wives of other men.

So far as the present verse is concerned, we find the term ‘*prāṇānta*,’
‘*ending* in death,’—which shows that the *beginning* of the penalty
would be something else; for unless a thing has a *beginning*, it can
have no *end*. The term ‘*ending in death*’ means *that of which death
is the end*; *i.e*., the punishment should go on being inflicted until
death comes about. Thus it is that all such punishments as ‘confiscation
of property,’ ‘cutting off of limbs’ and so forth become included.

Each of these has been found in other cases to constitute a ‘punishment’
by itself. So that, when a number of punishments have been prescribed,
since all these cannot be inflicted for any single crime, the right
conclusion is that in the case of a non-Brāhmaṇa committing adultery
with a twice-born woman, the highest of those punishments shall be
inflicted, and the man shall be put to death. But even in the case of
women of lower castes, the death-penalty shall be inflicted in the case
of the man committing adultery with an unwilling family-woman whose
husband is alive.—(359)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Abrāhmaṇaḥ*’—‘*Kṣatriya* and the rest’ (misbehaving with a woman of
the higher caste) (Medhātithi and Nandana);—‘Śūdra misbehaving with a
Brāhmaṇa woman’ (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 388), which says that this
refers to the ‘non-Brāhmaṇa’ misbehaving with a woman of a superior
caste;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 115);—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p.
174) as laying down the penalty for one of the lower caste. misbehaving
with a woman of the higher caste.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Baudhāyana* (2.4.1-2).—‘Anybody but a Brāhmaṇa shall suffer corporal
punishment for Adultery;—the wives of men of all castes must be guarded
more carefully than wealth.’

*Āpastamba* (2.26.20).—‘If a man has actually committed adultery, his
organ shall be cut off together with the testicles.’

*Bṛhaspati* (23.10-12).—‘If a man violates an unwilling woman, the King
shall confiscate his entire property, have his penis and scrotum cut off
and have him paraded on an ass. When a man enjoys a woman by fraud, bis
punishment shall be confiscation of his entire wealth; and afterwards he
shall be branded with the mark of the female organ and banished from the
town. The highest fine shall be inflicted for connexion with a woman of
equal caste; half that for connexion with a woman of a lower caste; and
a man who has connexion with a woman of a higher caste shall be put to
death.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 389).—‘When a man has completed his
intercourse with the woman, by force, the penalty of death shall be
inflicted.’

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 392).—‘If a man has intercourse with a
woman who comes to him of her own accord, the punishment shall be half
of that in the case of the woman being unwilling.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 172).—‘A man shall never take liberties with an
unwilling woman; if he has illicit intercourse with a willing woman, he
shall be fined 50 Paṇas, and the woman, half of that.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

संयतया अनिच्छन्त्या ब्राह्मण्या सह संग्रहणे **अब्राह्मणः** शूद्रः **प्राणान्तं दण्डम् अर्हति** । क्षत्रियवैश्याभ्यां तु वर्णवत् तदूना दण्डपरिकल्पना । एवं क्षत्रियवैश्ययोः ब्राह्मणीसंग्रहणे ऽनयाइवापेक्षया दण्डः कल्पयितव्यः, वैश्यस्य च क्षत्रियया । इच्छन्तीषु च ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियावैश्यासु असंयतासु च पूर्ववद् दण्डः कल्पनीयः । संभाषणप्रतिषेधप्रतिप्रसवार्थ्[अम् इदम् उच्यते], किंचिद् विशेषेण ॥ ८.३५८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

359	A man who is not a Brahmana ought to suffer death for adultery (samgrahana); for the wives of all the four castes even must always be carefully guarded.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/360_bhixukA_bandinash.md">
<details open><summary><h3>360 भिक्षुका बन्दिनश् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

भिक्षुका बन्दिनश् चैव  
दीक्षिताः कारवस् तथा ।  
संभाषनं सह स्त्रीभिः  
कुर्युर् अप्रतिवारिताः  ॥ ८.३६० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/360_bhixukA_bandinash.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Mendicants, bards, persons initiated for a rite and craftsmen may converse with women, unchecked.—(360)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**भिक्षुका** भिक्षाजीविनो भिक्षायाचनारूपं संभाषणम् **अवारिताः** **कुर्युर्** यदि स्वामिना न निषिद्धाः । अथ वा नैते वारयितव्याः । **बन्दिनः** स्तावकाः । **दीक्षिता** यज्ञे भृतिवचनार्थं संभाषेरन् । **कारवः** सूपकारादयः । एते तीर्थादिष्व् अपि न निवार्याः ॥ ८.३६० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Mendicants*,’— those living on alms; these may talk to women, in the
act of begging, if they are not ‘*checked*’ by their husbands.

Or, the meaning may be that they shall not be checked or forbidden in
this.

‘*Bards*,’—those who sing the praises of kings.

‘*Initiated at a rite*,’—These persons would have to speak to women in
the course of the response that they have to make in acceptance of their
appointment.

‘*Craftsmen*,’—cooks and others.

These should not be prevented even at such places as the watering-place
and the like.—(360)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 386), which adds the
following notes ‘*Vandinaḥ*,’ bards singing the praises of
people,—‘*dīkṣitāḥ*,’ persons initiated for a sacrificial
performance,—‘*kāravaḥ*,’ professional artisans;—and in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 1002).
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

भिक्षुकादीनाम् असत्य् अपि कारणे संभाषणं गृहेष्व् अभ्यनुज्ञायते । ताभिः सह तीर्थादिषु तु विजनेषु सत्य् अपि कारणे भिक्षुकादयो नाभिभाषेरन्, शङ्कास्थानेषु ॥ ८.३५९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

360	Mendicants, bards, men who have performed the initiatory ceremony of a Vedic sacrifice, and artisans are not prohibited from speaking to married women.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/361_na_sambhAShAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>361 न सम्भाषाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

न संभाषां परस्त्रीभिः  
प्रतिषिद्धः समाचरेत् ।  
निषिद्धो भाषमाणस् तु  
सुवर्णं दण्डम् अर्हति  ॥ ८.३६१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/361_na_sambhAShAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

One should not converse with the wives of other men, when forbidden. If, on being forbidden, he does converse, he becomes liable to be fined one ‘suvarṇa.’—(361)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>
<u>केचिद्</u> भिक्षुकादीनां निवारितानां संभाषणे दण्डो ऽयम् इति मन्यन्ते । 

<u>तद् असत्</u> । नैव ते निवार्या इत्य् उक्तम् । कुतश् च भिक्षुकाणां सुवर्णो दण्डः । तस्मात् को ऽपि प्रकाशम् अनाक्षारितो ऽपि कथंचिन् निषिद्धः स्वामिना[^२३५] समाचरन् सुवर्णं दण्ड्यः ॥ ८.३६१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Some people think that the punishment here laid down is meant for the
case where mendicants and the rest first mentioned carry on the
conversation, even after being forbidden.

This however is not right. It has been said that these men are not to be
forbidden. Then again, how could the fine of a ‘*suvarṇa*’ be imposed
upon a mendicant?

Hence the person meant to be fined one ‘*suvarṇa*’ is one who, even
though not previously accused, has been forbidden by the woman’s
husband, and yet goes on conversing with her.—(361)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 386);—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 1011);—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 173),
which explains ‘*niṣiddhaḥ*’ as ‘forbidden by the husband or other
relatives of the woman.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.285).—‘If a man converses with a woman who has been
forbidden to do so, the woman shall be fined one hundred, and the man,
two hundred; if both have been previously forbidden, the punishment for
conversing shall be the same as in adultery.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 856).—‘A mendicant male or female, a
player,—if these enter the residence of women, after being forbidden,
they shall be fined two hundred; and the man who may have admitted them,
or who affords them the opportunity for entering, shall be punished like
an adulterer.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

परस्त्रिया सह संभाषणं शास्त्रेण प्रतिषिद्धम् । व्यतिक्रमे दण्डम् अर्हति ॥ ८.३६० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

361	Let no man converse with the wives of others after he has been forbidden (to do so); but he who converses (with them), in spite of a prohibition, shall be fined one suvarna.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/362_naiSha_chAraNadAreShu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>362 नैष चारणदारेषु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

नैष चारणदारेषु  
विधिर् नात्मोपजीविषु ।  
सज्जयन्ति हि ते नारीर्  
निगूढाश् चारयन्ति च  ॥ ८.३६२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/362_naiSha_chAraNadAreShu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

This rule does not apply to the case of the wives of dancers and singers, or of those who make a living of themselves; for these men secretly bring their women into contact (with other men), and tempt them on.—(362)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यः संभाषणप्रतिषेध उपकारक्रियाप्रतिषेधश् च नैष **चारणदारेषु** स्यात् । **चारणा** नटगायनाद्याः प्रेक्षणकारिणः । तथा **आत्मोपजीविषु** वेषेण जीवत्सु ये दाराः । अथ वात्मजायैव "अर्धो ह वा एष आत्मा" (श्ब् ५.२.१.१०) इति तां य उपजीवन्ति उपपतिक्षमकाः[^२३६] । **सज्जयन्ति** संश्लेषयन्ति ते चारणः परपुरुषेण[^२३७] । **निगूढाः** प्रछन्नम्, आपणभूमौ न तिष्ठन्ते । गृहवेषत्वाद् एव ताः प्रसिद्धवेश्याभ्यो भिद्यन्ते । **चारयन्ति** **च** ता मैथुनं प्रवर्तयन्ति नेत्रभ्रूविलासपरिहासादिभिः पुरुषान् आकर्षयन्ति । तदनुज्ञानं[^२३८] सज्जनम्, चारणं[^२३९] संप्रयोग एव । अथ वा स्वा नारीः सज्जयन्ति योजयन्ति,[^२४०] अन्याश्[^२४१] च स्त्रीभिश् **चारयन्ति** प्रवर्तयन्ति वेश्यात्वं कुट्टिनीत्वं च स्वधाराणां[^२४२] कारयन्तीत्य् अर्थः ॥ ८.३६२ ॥


[^२४२]:
     M G: sudhārāṇāṃ


[^२४१]:
     M G: antyāś


[^२४०]:
     M G: nārī jayati; M G DK omit: yojayanti


[^२३९]:
     M G: vāraṇaṃ


[^२३८]:
     M G: tadanujñānāṃ; DK: tadanujñātāḥ


[^२३७]:
     M G DK: cāraṇapuruṣeṇa


[^२३६]:
     M G DK (1: 1854) omit: upapatikṣamakāḥ and add: utkṛṣṭam ākāraṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The aforesaid prohibition regarding conversing with women does not apply
to the case of ‘*wives of dancers and singers*’;—the term ‘*cāraṇa*’
standing for dancers, singers and other actors.

So also in the case of those ‘*who make a living of
themselves*,’—*i.e*., those wives who live upon their own beauty;—the
term ‘*jīviṣu*’ qualifying the masculine noun ‘*dārāḥ*’ (wives). Or
‘themselves’ may stand for ‘wives,’—the wife being half the self of the
man; and the term stands for *those who live upon their wives*;—*i.e.,
those who condone the presence of paramours for their wives*.

‘*Bring into contact*,’—unite their wives with other men.

‘*Secretly*,’—*i.e*., not in the open market-place. These women differ
from public prostitutes in this that they carry on their intrigues
within their own homes.

‘*Tempt them on*,’—eg g them on to actual sexual intercourse; enticing
the men by means of glances and jokes.

‘*Bringing into contact*’ implies *connivance*, while ‘*tempting*’
implies leading on to the actual act.

Or, the meaning may be that ‘they bring into contact, unite, their own
wives, and seduce, through their wives, the wives of other men’; *i.e.,
they* make their wives act as prostitutes as well as go-betweens.—(362)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 387), which adds the
following notes:—In the case of the wives of *Cāraṇas* and other people
of that class, and also in that of the wives of those who make a living
by ‘their own’ (wife’s beauty),—the aforesaid rule prohibiting
conversation, or that prescribing the punishment for conversing, does
not apply,—because it is the business of these people to help their
wives to come in contact with other men, and themselves to bring about
their intercourse in secret.’

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.285), where *Bālambhaṭṭī* has the
following notes:—‘The said rule is not applicable to cases where
conversation is held with the wives of actors, singers and people of
that class who make a living by the beauty of their own (wives), *i.e*.,
those who permit other men to have intercourse with their *wives*,—the
wife being called ‘*ātman*,’ in accordance with the dictum that ‘the
wife and son of a man are his very *self*,’—‘for the purpose of making
money, and help their wives to meet other men, and even connive
secretly—showing as if they did not see it—at other men coming to their
wives.’

It is quoted in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 174), which has the following
notes:—‘*Cāraṇa*,’ dancer,—‘*ātmopajīvin*’ is the professional actor,
who makes a living by his ‘*ātman*,’ *i.e*., his *wife*,—these two
clashes of men deck up their wives for the purpose of entrapping young
men, and hence conversation with their wives is not to be penalised,
though intercourse with these also is to be punished;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 156a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.362-363)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (2.4.3).—‘Corporal punishment shall not be inflicted for
adultery with the wives of minstrels and play-actors; for their husbands
themselves either actually lead them to other men, or concealed at home,
permit them to hold culpable intercourse.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.293).—‘For approaching a female ascetic, the fine is
twenty-four *Paṇas*.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

संभाषणानुज्ञानं चैवैतत्, नोपगमनस्य । यतो ऽत्र राजदण्डाभावमात्रम्, न त्व् अत्यन्तम् अदृष्टदोषाभावः । यतः ईषद्दोषस् तूपगन्तुः स्याद् इति । यतः नायं पूर्वप्रतिषेधविषयः । यस्माद् अपरैषा वेशजातिः । एवं च कारणाद् ऋते ऽप्य् आभिः सह संभाषमाणे न संग्रहणं प्राप्नुयात् ॥ ८.३६१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

362	This rule does not apply to the wives of actors and singers, nor (of) those who live on (the intrigues of) their own (wives); for such men send their wives (to others) or, concealing themselves, allow them to hold criminal intercourse.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/363_ki~n_chid.md">
<details open><summary><h3>363 किञ् चिद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

किं चिद् एव तु दाप्यः स्यात्  
संभाषां ताभिर् आचरन् ।  
प्रैष्यासु चैकभक्तासु  
रहः प्रव्रजितासु च [मेधातिथिपाठः - प्रेष्यासु]  ॥ ८.३६३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/363_ki~n_chid.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Yet he who secretly carries on conversation with these women, or with maidservants devoted to one master, or with female ascetics, should be made to pay something.—(363)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**रहो** ऽप्रकाशं विजने देशे चारणनारीभिः **संभाषां**[^२४३] कुर्वन् **किंचित्** सुवर्णाद् अत्यन्ताल्पं[^२४४] स त्रिंशद्भागादिकं[^२४५] जातिप्रतिष्ठाने अपेक्ष्य दण्ड्यः । यतो न परिपूर्णं तासु वेश्यात्वम् । भर्तृभिर् अनुज्ञाता हि ताः प्रणयन्ते[^२४६] । तत्र भर्तृविज्ञानार्थं दूतीमुखेन व्यवहर्तव्यम् । न तु साक्षात् ताभिर् अस्वतन्त्रत्वात् । प्रकाशं तु नृत्यन्तीनां गायन्तीनां वाभिनयतालादिनिरूपणावसरे कीदृशम् एतद् इत्यादिप्रश्नद्वारं संभाषणम् अनिषिद्धम् । 


[^२४६]:
     J: patnyāyante


[^२४५]:
     M G J: triṃśadbhāgikaṃ


[^२४४]:
     M G J: suvarṇādyatyantālpaṃ


[^२४३]:
     M G: saṃbhāṣaṃ

**प्रेष्या** दास्यः सप्तभिर् दासयोनिभिर् उपनताः । एकं भजन्ते **एकभक्ता** एकेनावरुद्धाः । तत्रान्यो ऽप्य् अस्ति दण्डलेशः । 


- किं पुनर् अयं दासीशब्दः संबन्धिशब्दो य एव यस्याः स्वामी तस्यैव दासी उत सूपकारादिशब्दवत् कर्ममूलकः ।

इह तावद् आद्या एव स्थितिः, विशेषणोपादाने ऽसामर्थ्यात् । या यस्य दासी वेश्यावच् चानैः संसृज्यते, राजदासीव दासी वा,[^२४७] सा निगृह्यन्ते[^२४८] । सा चेन् नावरुद्धा न दोषः संग्रहणे । अवरुद्धायाम् अनेन दण्ड उक्तः । रिक्थविभागे[^२४९] चैतन् निपुणं वक्ष्यामः ।   

**प्रव्रतिजाः** अरक्षकाः शीलमित्रादयः । ता हि कामुक इव लिङ्गप्रच्छन्नाः[^२५०] ॥ ८.३६३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Secretly*’—not in public, but in a solitary spot;—he who carries on
conversation with the women of dancers and singers,—should be fined
‘*something*’—*i.e*., some small amount of gold—the thirtieth part of a
‘*suvarṇa*’ or some such thing; the exact amount being determined in
conformity with the caste of the party concerned and the circumstances
attending each case. The reason why some punishment is necessary lies in
the fact that the women concerned are not entirely public women,—it is
with the permission of their husbands that they admit paramours. It is
on account of this fact of their not being independent that they should
be approached, not directly, but through a go-between; for the purpose
of ascertaining if the mesalliance has the husband’s sanction.

Holding conversation with them *openly* however,—when for instance, they
are dancing and singing, and they are questioned regarding the tune or
the timing and other details of the song,—this is not forbidden.

‘*Maidservant*’ is *slave-girl*; acquired by any one of the seven
methods of acquiring slaves.

‘*Devoted to one master*,’—*i.e*., those that are the kept mistresses of
any one man.

In the case of these last there is some ground for other kinds of
punishment also.

“Is the term ‘maidservant’ meant to be a relative term,—meaning the
slave owned by a certain master P Or does it denote simply a *servant*,
just like such terms as ‘cook’ and the like?”

In the present context the term is used in the former sense The meaning
being that when some one has intercourse with a slave girl or a
prostitute kept by another man,—such woman is punished, just as a king’s
slave would be. If however the girl has not been ‘kept’ by any one, then
there is no wrong done. As the present text prescribes the punishment to
be inflicted for ‘adultery’ with a woman ‘kept’ by another man.

We shall explain this in greater detail under the section on division of
property.

‘*Female ascetics*,’—those having no guardian to look after them,
*e.g*., *Śilamitrā* and so forth (?) These women hide their lascivious
tendencies under the cloak of asceticism.—(363)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Pravrajitāsu*’—‘Women without protectors’ (Medhātithi);—‘Female
mendicants (Nārāyaṇa);—‘nuns’ (Kulluka);—‘Buddhist and other nuns’
(Rāghavānanda and Rāmacandra).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 387), to the effect that
even in the case of the said women, if the man holds conversation
secretly, he is to be punished. It adds the following
notes:—‘*Praiṣyāsu*,’ slave-girls,—‘*ekabhaktāsu*,’ a woman kept by one
man only,—‘*pravrajitāsu*,’ ‘Buddhist and other nuns’;—‘*kiñcit*, *i*.
*e*., something less than the ‘*Suvarṇa*’ which has been prescribed (in
verse 361) as the fine.

It is quoted in *Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 285), to the effect that even in the
case of the wives of actors and the rest, if a man holds conversation in
solitary places, he should be fined some little amount; as these also
are ‘wives of other men;’ similarly some little fine is to be imposed
for conversing with such women as kept slave-girls, nuns and so forth.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.362-363)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.362].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**रह** इति चैतद् विशेषणं सर्वशेषम् ॥ ८.३६२ ॥

_स्त्रीप्रसङ्गाच् च कन्यागतम् अपीदम् उच्यते ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

363	Yet he who secretly converses with such women, or with female slaves kept by one (master), and with female ascetics, shall be compelled to pay a small fine.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/364_yo.akAmAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>364 यो ऽकामाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यो ऽकामां दूषयेत् कन्यां  
स सद्यो वधम् अर्हति ।  
स-कामां दूषयंस् तुल्यो  
न वधं प्राप्नुयान् नरः  ॥ ८.३६४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/364_yo.akAmAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a man of equal status violates an unwilling maiden, he deserves immediate death; but if he violates a willing one, he shall not suffer death.—(364)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पासङ्गिकम् इदम् । **तुल्यः** समानजातीयः । सो ऽनिच्छन्तीं कुमारीं **दूषयेत्** कौमार्याद् अपच्यावयेत् स्त्रीपुरुषसंभोगेन, **सद्यस्** तस्मिन्न् एवाहन्य् अविलंबं हन्तव्यः । **सकामाया** दूषणं नास्ति, कुतो वधप्राप्तिः[^२५१] । यच् चात्र भविष्यति तद् वक्ष्यामः । यद्य् अपि तुल्यवध इत्य् एवात्र श्रुतं[^२५२] वधे[^२५३] ऽपि जात्यपेक्षायाम् अवश्यंभाविन्यां प्रत्यासत्त्या संबाध्यते ॥ ८.३६४ ॥


[^२५३]:
     J: vadho


[^२५२]:
     M G: ity avadheḥ śrutaṃ; J: tylya ity vātra śrutaṃ


[^२५१]:
     J: dūṣaṇe nāsti vadhaprāptiḥ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What is stated here is only by the way.

‘*Of equal status*’—belonging to the same caste as the girl.

If he ‘*violates an unwilling maiden*’—*i.e*., deprives her of her
virginity, through sexual intercourse,—he should be killed on the same
day, without delay.

In the case of the willing maiden, there is no real ‘violating’; how
could there be any possibility of death being inflicted? We shall
explain later on what should be done in such a case.

Though in the present text only the man ‘of equal caste’ has been
mentioned, yet from considerations of the castes of the parties
concerned, death also would be inflicted in certain cases.—(364)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 401), which explains
‘*akāmām*’ as ‘unwilling,’—and ‘*tulyaḥ*’ as a ‘man belonging to a caste
intercourse with which is lawful.’

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 858), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Akāmām*,’ ‘unwilling’—‘*konyām*,’ ‘unmarried girl who retains
her virginity’—if one violates,—he, whether he be of the same caste as
the maiden, or of a different caste, deserves death, *if he is not a
Brāhmaṇa*; if he is a Brāhmaṇa, some other penalty has to be imposed
upon him.—If however the maiden is willing and is violated by a man who
is her ‘equal’—belongs to the same caste as herself—then the penalty
shall be, not death, but the ‘highest amercement.’

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.288) to the effect that even in the case
of a maiden of the same caste, if one has intercourse with her, when she
is not willing, the penalty is *death*; but *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds that this
refers to non-Brāhmaṇas,—and that the ‘death, *vadha*’ means the
*cutting off of the male organ* and so forth;—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 157a).

It is quoted in Parāśaramādhava (Vyavahāra, p. 321);—and. in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 175), which explains the meaning to be that ‘if a
man despoils a virgin of the same caste without her consent, he deserves
*vadha*, not if he does it with her consent.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.364-368)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.287-218).—‘A man who carries away a decorated maiden,
of the same caste as himself, shall pay the highest amercement; but the
lowest amercement, if she is not decorated; if she belongs to a higher
caste, corporal punishment shall be inflicted. If the man has earned
away a maiden of a caste lower than himself, there is no offence, if she
has gone with her consent; otherwise, the fine inflicted shall be of the
lowest degree. If the maiden has been defiled, the hands of the man
shall he cut off; and he shall he killed if the maiden is of a higher
caste.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Aparārka, p. 859).—‘If the man has intercourse with an
unwilling maiden, he shall have two of his fingers cut off, and he shall
also pay a fine. If the maiden is of a higher caste, he shall he killed.
If the maiden belongs to the same caste and has been willing, he shall
pay the nuptial fee and also give her ornaments and a double dowry, and
then accept her as wife.’

*Nārada* (12.71-72).—‘When a man has connection with a maiden against
her will, he shall have two fingers cut off. If the maiden belongs to
the highest caste, death and the confiscation of his entire property
shall he his punishment. When, however, he has connection with a willing
maiden, it is no offence; hut he shall bestow ornaments on her, honour
her with other presents and then lawfully espouse her.’

*Bṛhaspati* (23.10).—‘The King shall confiscate the entire property of
one who violates an unwilling woman; and having his penis and scrotum
cut off, shall cause him to he paraded on an ass.’

*Āpastamba* (2.26-21).—‘If one has intercourse with a maiden, his
porperty shall he confiscated and he shall be banished.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 401).—‘One who violates an unwilling
maiden, shall he immediately killed; if he defiles her with her consent,
he shall he fined the first amercement.’

*Ārthaśāstra* (p. 172).—‘If one violates a maiden of the same caste as
himself, before puberty, his hands shall be cut off, or he shall be
fined four hundred; if she has attained puberty, his middle and index
fingers shall be cut off, or a fine of 200 shall be imposed, and he
shall pay damages to her father.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 173).—‘If one outrages a girl after marriage, he
should pay a fine of 54 Paṇas; he shall also make good the nuptial fee
paid by her husband and also the expenses of her marriage.’

Do. (p. 172).—‘One may make love to a maiden who has had seven monthly
courses, who has not met her husband after her betrothal; nor shall he
pay any damages to the father. If three years have elapsed since her
puberty there is no offence in a man of the same caste having
intercourse with her after three years; even one of inferior caste
incurs no offence, if the girl is not decorated; he would be a thief if
he took with the girl the ornaments given her by her father.’

Do. (p. 174).—‘If a girl is willingly deflowered by another girl of the
same caste, she should pay a fine of 12 Paṇas, and the woman who has
outraged her, double of that. If a man deflowers a girl without her
consent, he shall be fined a hundred and shall also pay the nuptial fee.
If she has deflowered herself, she should he made the King’s slave. If
one forcibly takes away a maiden, he should he fined 200; if she is
adorned with golden ornaments, then the highest amercement.’
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

364	He who violates an unwilling maiden shall instantly suffer corporal punishment; but a man who enjoys a willing maiden shall not suffer corporal punishment, if (his caste be) the same (as hers).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/365_kanyAm_bhajantIm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>365 कन्याम् भजन्तीम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

कन्यां भजन्तीम् उत्कृष्टं  
न किं चिद् अपि दापयेत् ।  
जघन्यं सेवमानां तु  
संयतां वासयेद् गृहे  ॥ ८.३६५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/365_kanyAm_bhajantIm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a maiden approaches a superior person, she shall not be made to pay anything; if however she courts an inferior person, she shall be kept confined in the house.—(365)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

जातिधनशीलविद्यानाम् अन्यतमेनापि पितृकुलाद् **उत्कृष्टं भजन्तीं** प्रवर्तितमैथुनां **न**[^२५४] **किंचिद्** दण्डयेत् । कन्यायाः स्वातन्त्र्याभावात् तद्रक्षाधिकृतानां पित्रादीनां दण्डे प्राप्ते प्रतिषेधः । **जघन्यं** जात्यादिभिर् हीनं **सेवमानां** मैथुनायोत्कलयन्तीं[^२५५] **संयतां** निवृत्तक्रीडाविहारा कञ्चुकिभिर् अधिष्ठितां पितृगृह एव **वासयेद्** यावन् निवृत्ताभिलाषा संजाता । अथ हीनजातीये निर्वृत्तप्रीतिविशेषा तदा आ अन्त्योच्छ्वासात् संयतैव तिष्ठेत् ॥ ८.३६५ ॥


[^२५५]:
     DK (1: 1866): maithunāyānukūlayantīṃ


[^२५४]:
     M G omit: na
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If a maiden ‘*approaches*’—has sexual intercourse with—‘a *superior
person*’—one whose caste, wealth, character, learning is superior to
that of her father’s family,—she shall not be fined anything.

In as much as the girl is never her own mistress, the punishment would
fall upon her guardians, father and others; and it is the punishment
that is precluded here.

‘*Inferior*—in caste or other things.

‘*Courts*,’—tries to have intercourse with.

‘*Confined*,’—not being allowed to take part in any amusements, and
guarded by attendants.

She shall be made to live in her father’s house, till she gets rid of
her love-longings. If however she continues to have her love centred in
the inferior persons, then she should be kept confined till her last
breath.—(365).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Samyatām*’—‘Kept away from amusements and guarded by chamberlains’
\[not ‘relatives’ as stated by Buhler\] (Medhātithi);—‘bound’
(Nārāyaṇa). Kullūka is misrepresented by Buhler: he says nothing about
‘fettering’; he only says that she is to be kept in the house ‘with
care’.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 404), which explains
‘*Sāvamānām*’ as ‘winning him over to herself for the purposes of sexual
intercourse’,—and ‘*samyatām*’ as ‘imprisoned.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.364-368)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.364].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ऋज्वर्थः ॥ ८.३६४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

365	From a maiden who makes advances to a (man of) high (caste), he shall not take any fine; but her, who courts a (man of) low (caste), let him force to live confined in her house.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/366_uttamAM_sevamAnas.md">
<details open><summary><h3>366 उत्तमां सेवमानस् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

उत्तमां सेवमानस् तु  
जघन्यो वधम् अर्हति ।  
शुल्कं दद्यात् सेवमानः  
समाम् इच्छेत् पिता यदि  ॥ ८.३६६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/366_uttamAM_sevamAnas.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

An inferior man courting a superior maiden deserves death; he who courts a maiden of equal status, shall pay the nuptial fee, if her father so wishes.—(366).
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अकामाया कन्याया[^२५६] दूषणे ब्राह्मणवर्जम् अविशेषेण हीनोत्तमानां वध एव दण्ड इत्य् उक्तम् । सकामाया दूषणे त्व् इदम् आहुः । **उत्तमां** रूपयौवनजातिभिः[^२५७] । **जघन्यो** ऽत्यन्तनिकृष्टः । नातिसाम्ये ऽपि गुणैर् वध्यः । **समां** तु गच्छन् सकामां स **शुल्कम्** आसुरविवाह इव पित्रे **दद्यात्** । न चेद् इच्छति पिता तदा राज्ञे दण्डं तावन्तम् । 


[^२५७]:
     M G: -jātyābhiḥ


[^२५६]:
     M G DK omit: kanyāyā

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च गान्धर्वो ऽयं विवाहः "इच्छयान्योन्यसंयोगः" (म्ध् ३.३२) इति । तत्र न युक्तो दण्डः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;केनोक्तं गान्धर्वे नास्ति दण्डः । अत एव नायं सतीधर्मः, न चायं विवाहः, अग्निसंस्काराभावात् । यद् अपि शाकुन्तले व्यासवचनम् "अमन्त्रकम् अनग्निकम्" इति तद् दुष्यन्तेन कामपीडितेनैवं कृतम् । न चेच्छासंयोगमात्रं विवाहः । स्वीकरणोपायभेदाद् अष्टौ विवाहाः, न पुनर् विवाहभेदात् । वृत्तवरणं तत्र पुनः कर्तव्यम् एवम् इति ।

अथ वा ऋतुदर्शनोत्तरकालं गान्धर्वः । प्राग् ऋतोः शुल्को दण्डो वा । अथ कन्यायाः का प्रतिपत्तिः । तस्मा एव देया । निवृत्ताभिलाषा चेत् कामम् अन्यत्र प्रतिपद्या । शुल्कग्रहणं चात्रापि सकृद् उपभोगनिष्कृत्यर्थम् अस्त्य् एव । वरश् चेन् निवृत्ताभिलाषो हठाद् ग्राहयितव्यः ॥ ८.३६६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been said that in the case of violating an unwilling maiden, all
men, be they superior or inferior, should suiter death, with the sole
exception of the *Brāhmaṇa*; and the present verse, they say, lays down
the law relating to the violating of a willing maiden.

‘*Superior*,’—in beauty, youth, caste and other points.

‘*Inferior*’—the lowest.

The man is not to be killed if there is any equality between the
parties.

If a man approaches a willing maiden who is equal to him in status,—he
shall pay to her father the nuptial fee, as is done in the case of the
‘*Asura*’ form of marriage. But if the father does not desire to receive
the fee, that amount shall be paid as fine to the king.

“In as much as this would he a case of ‘*Gāndharva*’ marriage—marriage
by mutual consent,—it cannot be right to inflict any punishment.”

Who has said that there is to be no punishment in the case of marriage
by mutual consent? In fact such an act would not be one befitting a
chaste woman; nor would it he regarded as ‘marriage,’ for the simple
reason that it would not have a sacramental character. As for the
declaration in the Mahābhārata, in connection with Śakuntalā, to the
effect that ‘the *Gāndharva* is a form of marriage, without fire and
without mantras,’—this was an assertion made by Duṣyanta while he was
suffering from the pangs of love. Further, mere ‘willing intercourse’
does not constitute ‘marriage.’ Marriage has been classified under eight
heads on the basis of different methods used for taking a wife; and it
does not mean that there are eight kinds of marriage. So that (in the
*Gāndharva* marriage also), the due selection of the bridegroom (even
though he has been already chosen by the bride) and the subsequent rites
have got to be performed.

Or, the ‘*Gāndharva*’ may be accepted as a ‘marriage’ only in the case
of a maiden after puberty; and before that, the man is to pay the
nuptial fee or a fine.

The question arises—what is to be done with the maiden?

The answer is that she shall be given to that same man. But if she has
ceased to love him, she may be given to another man. But in either case
the ‘nuptial fee’ has got to be paid, by way of compensation for the
single act of intercourse.

If the man has ceased to love the girl, he shall be forced to accept
her.—(366)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 402), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Uttamām*’ has to be qualified by ‘if
willing’;—‘*samām*,’ belonging to the same caste as himself;—‘*śulkam*’,
fee agreed upon by both the parties, as in the ‘Āsura’ form of marriage.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 321), to the effect
that when a man of the lower caste has intercourse with a maiden of a
higher caste, whether willing or unwilling, his penalty is death, but
when one has intercourse with a willing maiden of the same caste as
himself, then he shall present to her father a cow and a bull, if the
latter be willing to accept it (and the man has to marry the maiden in
this case, adds *Bālambhaṭṭī*); but if the father is not willing to
receive the fee, its equivalent shall be paid as fine to the king (and
in this case also the maiden is to be married to the man).

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 157a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.364-368)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.364](http://www.wisdomlib.org/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc201297.html#comparative-notes "English translation of verse").
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अविशेषाभिधानात् सकामाम् अकामां चोत्तमां सेवमानस्य जघन्यस्य वध एव । **समां** तु सकामां सेवमानस्य शुल्कदानं तत्समो वा दण्डः । एतच्छ्लोकनिबन्धनश् च पूर्वः संग्रहणप्रकरणे श्लोकः "अब्राह्मणः संग्रहणे प्राणान्तं दण्डम् अर्हति" इति ॥ ८.३६५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

366	A (man of) low (caste) who makes love to a maiden (of) the highest (caste) shall suffer corporal punishment; he who addresses a maiden (on) equal (caste) shall pay the nuptial fee, if her father desires it.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/367_abhiShahya_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>367 अभिषह्य तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अभिषह्य तु यः कन्यां  
कुर्याद् दर्पेण मानवः ।  
तस्याशु कर्त्ये अङ्गुल्यौ  
दण्डं चाऽर्हति षट्शतम् [मेधातिथिपाठः - कर्त्या अङ्गुल्यो]  ॥ ८.३६७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/367_abhiShahya_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But if any man wantonly defiles a maiden through sheer audacity, his fingers should be instantly clipped off, or he should be fined six hundred.—(367)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यद्य् अपि सकामा कन्या पित्रादयस्[^२५८] तु तस्याः संनिहितास् तान् अनिच्छतो **ऽभिषह्य** अभिभूय **दर्पेण** बलेन, "कः किं कर्तुं मे शक्तः", कन्यानुरागमाताश्रितः कन्यां **कुर्याद्** विकुर्याद् दूषयेत् । अनेकार्थः करोतिः । **तस्याशु कर्त्याः** छेत्तव्या अर्धाङ्गुलयः, षट्शतानि वा दण्ड्यः । 


[^२५८]:
     M G: pitrā yas

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु "यो ऽकामां दूषयेत्" (म्ध् ८.३६४) इत्य् अस्यैव वध्यर्थस्योपसंहारो[^२५९] ऽयम् ।


[^२५९]:
     DK: vadhārtha-

ताडनात् प्रभृति मारणं यावद् वध्यर्थः[^२६०] । तत्रेमां निकृष्टजातीयां च दूषयन् न मार्यते, अपि त्व् अङ्गुली अस्य छिद्येत ॥ ८.३६७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Even though the maiden may be willing, if her parents and other
relatives are close hy, and their presence is not heeded by the man who,
*through sheer audacity*, relying upon his force and having the idea
‘who can do anything to me?’—and relying solely upon the maiden’s love
for him—‘*defiles her*,’—the root ‘*kṛ*’ which has many meanings, stands
here for the act *of defiling*, then ‘*his fingers should be clipped
off*’;—or ‘*he should be fined six hundred*.’

Others have held that this verse sums up what has been said (under 361)
regarding the violating of an unwilling maiden, to be punished with
‘death.’ ‘Killing’ in this connection stands for corporal
punishment—beginning with beating and ending with actual killing; and
what the present text means is that if a man defiles a maiden of a low
caste, he shall not be *killed*.—he shall have only his fingers clipped
off.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 321), to the
effect that two fingers are to be cut off if the man only defiles the
maiden with his fingers;—in *Aparārka* (p. 858), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Abhiṣahya*’, forcibly,—‘*kuryāt*,’ defile the maiden
by the introduction of fingers,—the two fingers (its reading being
‘*kartye aṅgulyau*’) with which he defiles her should be cut off at
once, without delay;—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 403), which has the
following notes:—‘*Abhiṣahya*,’ insolently,—‘*kuryāt*,’ should
defile,—‘*kalpye*’ (which is its reading for ‘*kartye*’), should be cut
off;—and in *Mitākṣarā* (2.288), to the effect that when a man defiles
an unwilling maiden of the same caste as himself by thrusting his
fingers into her, he should be fined 600 and two of his fingers should
be cut off.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 157a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.364-368)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.364](http://www.wisdomlib.org/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc201297.html#comparative-notes "English translation of verse").
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अकामां सेवमानस्याङ्गुलिच्छेदेनं दण्डं च **षट्शतम्** । अन्येषां तु पाठः- "अविषह्यां तु यः कन्यां कुर्याद् दर्पेण मानवः" इति ॥ ८.३६६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

367	But if any man through insolence forcibly contaminates a maiden, two of his fingers shall be instantly cut off, and he shall pay a fine of six hundred (panas).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/368_sa-kAmAn_dUShayaMs.md">
<details open><summary><h3>368 स-कामान् दूषयंस् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

स-कामां दूषयंस् तुल्यो  
नाऽङ्गुलि-च्छेदम् आप्नुयात् ।  
द्विशतं तु दमं दाप्यः  
प्रसङ्गविनिवृत्तये  ॥ ८.३६८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/368_sa-kAmAn_dUShayaMs.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A man of equal status defiling a willing maiden shall not suffer amputation of fingers; he should be made to pay the fine of two hundred with a view to prevent repetition.—(368)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सकामाम्** इत्य् अनुवादः, पूर्वस्यापि सकामविषयात् । अभिषह्य करणे पूर्वं दण्डः,[^२६१] अप्रकाशं चौर्यवद् द्विशतो ऽङ्गुलीच्छेदवर्जितः । अथ कस्मिंश्चित् पुरुषे ऽनुरागवती कन्या तेन संयुज्यमाना कन्यात्वनिवृत्तौ सकामा येन विकृतीक्रियते तस्यायं दण्डः । अथ वा[^२६२] हस्तस्पर्शमात्रम् इह दूषण । प्रार्थनीयायाः कन्याया हस्तस्पर्शः "मया स्पृष्टां ज्ञात्वा नान्य एताम् अर्थैष्यते ऽन्यस्मिन्न् अनुरागिणीं मन्यमानः" ॥ ८.३६८ ॥


[^२६२]:
     M G omit: vā


[^२६१]:
     DK (1: 1868): pūrvadaṇḍaḥ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Inasmuch as the foregoing verse also pertains to the case of a willing
maiden, the penalty therein laid down applies to the case where the man
defiles her through sheer audacity; while in a case where he does it by
stealth, secretly like a thief, the punishment shall consist of the fine
of two hundred, without the amputation of the fingers.

Or, the text may refer to the following case—

If the maiden happens to be in lore with a certain man, and having had
intercourse with him has lost her virginity,—then since the girl was
willing, the man, for the crime of defiling her, shall suffer the
penalty here laid down.

Or, the ‘*defiling*’ meant here may be taken as the *touching of the
hand* and some such part of the body; the man’s motive being—‘if people
see me touching her hand, they will think that she loves me and then no
one else will seek for her baud, and she shall be mine.’—(368)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 403), which adds that this
applies to the case where the maiden is of a lower caste;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 321);—in *Mitākṣarā* (2.288) as
providing for a case where the finger-defilement occurs in the case of a
willing maiden. *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds that ‘*tulyaḥ*’ means a man of the
same caste as the girl;—he is to be fined 200 with a view to prevent
repetition.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 157a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.364-368)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.364](http://www.wisdomlib.org/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc201297.html#comparative-notes "English translation of verse").
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

असमास्व् (?) एतत् स्यात् कन्यासूत्तमस्य ॥ ८.३६७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

368	A man (of) equal (caste) who defiles a willing maiden shall not suffer the amputation of his fingers, but shall pay a fine of two hundred (panas) in order to deter him from a repetition (of the offence).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/369_kanyaiva_kanyAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>369 कन्यैव कन्याम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

कन्यैव कन्यां या कुर्यात्  
तस्याः स्याद् द्विशतो दमः ।  
शुल्कं च द्विगुणं दद्याच्  
छिफाश् चैवाप्नुयाद् दश  ॥ ८.३६९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/369_kanyaiva_kanyAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a maiden pollutes another maiden, her fine shall be two hundred; she shall also pay the double of her nuptial fee and shall receive ten lashes.—(369)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

बालभावाद् रूपादिद्वेषाद् वा **कन्यैव कन्यां** नाशयेत् सा **द्विशतं** दाप्या । **शुल्कश्** **च** त्रिगुणः । 

<u>किं पुनः</u> शुल्कस्य परिमाणम् ।

एषाम् अन्यतमरूपसौन्दर्याद्यपेक्षं[^२६३] सौभाग्यापेक्षं च । **शिफा** रज्जुलताप्रहाराः ॥ ८.३६९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Either through childishness, or through jealousy for her greater beauty,
if a maiden pollutes another maiden, then she should be made to pay two
hundred; and also the double of her nuptial fee.

What Is the amount of this fee?

It shall depend upon the beauty of the girl, or upon her fortune and
other qualities.

‘*Lashes*’—strokes of rope or creeper.—(369).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 321);—in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 403), which adds that ‘*dviguṇam*’ means ‘double
of 200’;—and ‘*śiphā*’ stands for ‘strokes of creepers, ropes and such
other things’;—in *Aparārka* (p. 859), which adds the following
explanation:—If one maiden happen to penetrate another with her fingers
or some such thing, she shall pay a fine of 200 to the king, and that
fee or *price* which the defiled maiden is worth, *three times* (its
reading being ‘*triguṇam*’ or ‘*dviguṇam*’) that shall be paid to her by
the other girl, who is, in addition, to receive ten stripes—*i.e*.,
strokes of rope or creepers.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.288) to the same effect; where it adds
that ‘double the fee’ (*dviguṇam śulkam*) is to be paid by the offending
girl to the *father* of the defiled girl.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 1016);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 157a).
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

शुल्कं गोमिथुनं द्विगुणं कन्यापित्रे दद्यात् द्विशतं राजदण्डम् ॥ ८.३६८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

369	A damsel who pollutes (another) damsel must be fined two hundred (panas), pay the double of her (nuptial) fee, and receive ten (lashes with a) rod.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/370_yA_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>370 या तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

या तु कन्यां प्रकुर्यात् स्त्री  
सा सद्यो मौण्ड्यम् अर्हति ।  
अङ्गुल्योर् एव वा छेदं  
खरेणोद्वहनं तथा  ॥ ८.३७० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/370_yA_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But if a woman pollutes a maiden, she deserves immediate shaving off, or the amputation of two fingers, and also being carried by a donkey.—(370)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

स्त्रियां कन्यानां कन्यालिङ्गं नाशयन्त्यां **मौण्ड्यं** केशवपनं दण्डः, अङ्गुलिच्छेदो वा । **खरेणोद्वहनं** केशच्छेदपक्षे । कन्याजात्यादिभेदान् निग्राह्यभेदात् त्रैवर्णिकस्त्रीणां ब्राह्मणादिक्रमेणेमं दण्डम् इच्छन्ति मुद्राश् च कल्पयन्ति । ते प्रमाणाभावाद् उपेक्षणीयाः ॥ ८.३७० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If a woman destroys the virginity of a maiden, she shall have her head
shaven off; or undergo amputation of her fingers.

‘*Being carried by a donkey*’—in the case of shaving. Some people hold
that the different penalties are laid down in view of the caste of the
girl, and the caste of the polluter;—the three penalties applying to the
three castes Brāhmaṇa and the rest:

But there being no authority for such a view, it should be
ignored.—(370)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

According to ‘others’ in Medhātithi and Nārāyaṇa, the verse describes
three distinct penalties for women of the three distinct castes.
Govindarāja and Kullūka hold that in any one case, whether one or the
other of the three penalties shall be inflicted will depend upon the
circumstances of that case.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 321;—in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 403), which explains ‘*strī*’ as a woman who is
herself not a maiden;—in *Aparārka* (p. 859), which says *strī* meant
here is ‘other than a maiden’, the ‘maiden’ having been already dealt
with in the preceding verse;—in *Mitākṣarā* (2.288), which, explains
‘*strī*’as ‘a grown up experienced woman’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 157a), which explains ‘*prakuryāt*’ as ‘causes penetration.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

मौण्ड्या]ङ्गुलिच्छेदयोर् विकल्पः ॥ ८.३६९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

370	But a woman who pollutes a damsel shall instantly have (her head) shaved or two fingers cut off, and be made to ride (through the town) on a donkey.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/371_bhartAraM_langhayed.md">
<details open><summary><h3>371 भर्तारं लङ्घयेद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

भर्तारं लङ्घयेद् या तु  
स्त्री ज्ञाति-गुणदर्पिता ।  
तां श्वभिः खादयेद् राजा  
संस्थाने बहुसंस्थिते  ॥ ८.३७१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/371_bhartAraM_langhayed.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a woman, proud of relations and her qualities, passes over her husband, the king shall have her devoured by dogs in a place frequented by many.—(371)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

लङ्घनं **भर्तारम्** अतिक्रम्यान्यत्र गमनम्[^२६४] । तच् चेत् स्त्री करोति **दर्पेण** — "बहवो मे ज्ञातयो बलिनो द्रविणसंपन्नाः", स्त्रीगुणो रूपसौभाग्यातिशयसंपत्, किम् अनेन शीलरूपेण[^२६५] — इत्येवंदर्पेण[^२६६] । **तां श्वभिः खादयेद्** यावन् मृता । **संस्थानं** देशः । बहवः संस्थिता यत्र जनाश् चत्वरादौ ॥ ८.३७१ ॥


[^२६६]:
     M G J: ityeva darpeṇa


[^२६५]:
     M G: anenāśīla-


[^२६४]:
     M G: puruṣāgamanam; DK (1: 1865): puruṣe gamanam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Passing over*’ means neglecting the husband and going over to another
man; if a woman does this through ‘*pride*,’—the pride consisting in the
idea,—‘I have several relations who are powerful and wealthy, and I
myself am possessed of all the excellent qualities of a woman, such as
beauty and love,—why then should I mind my character?’

Such women the king shall get devoured, till they die.

‘*Place*’—spot; where many people congregate, such as road-crossings,
market-squares and so forth.—(371)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 119);—and in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 399), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Laṅghayet*’, disregarding her husband, if she goes to another
man,—‘*jñātistrīguṇadarpitā*’, being insolent on account of her
relatives and such feminine qualities as beauty and the like.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Gautama* (Aparārka, p. 857).—‘If one commits adultery with a woman of a
superior caste, his organ shall he cut off, and his property
confiscated.’

*Gautama* (23.14).—‘A woman who commits adultery with a man of lower
caste, the King shall cause to he devoured by dogs in a public place.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (21.1).—(See under next verse.)

*Viṣṇu* (5.18).—‘A woman who violates the duty which she owes to her
lord shall be put to death.’

*Nārada* (12.91).—‘When a married woman commits adultery, her head shall
be shaved, she shall have to he on the ground, receive bad food and bad
clothing and the removal of sweepings shall he assigned to her as her
occupation.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 400).—‘If during her husband’s absence,
a woman is detected in illicit intercourse, she shall he kept confined
till her husband’s return.’

*Yama* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 398).—‘If a Brāhmaṇa woman, deluded by
pride, has recourse to a Śūdra, her the King shall have devoured by dogs
at the place of execution. If a Brāhmaṇa woman has recourse to a Vaiśya
or a Kṣatriya, her head shall be shaved and she shall be paraded on an
ass.’

*Mahābhārata* (12.165.64).—‘If a woman forsakes a superior bed and has
recourse to an inferior one, the King shall have her torn by dogs in a
crowded place.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 171).—‘If during her husband’s absence a woman has
intercourse with her husband’s relative or servant, she should await her
husband’s return; if the husband forgives them, the two parties shall be
released; if he does not forgive, the woman’s ears and nose shall be cut
off and her lover shall be put to death.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.286).—‘If both parties to an adultery belong to the
same caste, the highest fine shall he inflicted on the man; if the woman
is of an inferior caste, the man shall he fined with the middle
amercement; if she belongs to a superior caste, the man shall be put to
death and the woman’s ears and other parts shall he cut off.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 400).—‘If during her husband’s
absence a man defiles a woman forcibly, he should he punished with
death, and there is no blame attaching to the woman.’

*Hārīta* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 396).—‘If a man violates the bed of one of
inferior caste, he should be made to be devoured by dogs, and the woman
should be burnt by wood-fire.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ज्ञातिदर्पेण स्त्री गुणवद्भर्तृव्यतिक्रमे श्वभिर् असौ खादयितव्या राज्ञा । अन्यस्यास् तु यः पुंसः परदारेषु सो ऽस्या दण्डः स्यात् । तच् च दर्शयति, "यत् पुंसः परदारेषु" इति प्रायश्चित्तविधौ ॥ ८.३७० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

371	If a wife, proud of the greatness of her relatives or (her own) excellence, violates the duty which she owes to her lord, the king shall cause her to be devoured by dogs in a place frequented by many.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/372_pumAMsan_dAhayet.md">
<details open><summary><h3>372 पुमांसन् दाहयेत् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पुमांसं दाहयेत् पापं  
शयने तप्त आयसे ।  
अभ्यादध्युश् च काष्ठानि  
तत्र दह्येत पापकृत्  ॥ ८.३७२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/372_pumAMsan_dAhayet.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The offending male he should make to lie down upon a redhot iron bed; they shall put wooden-logs over him, so that the sinner may be burnt.—(372)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यो ऽसौ पत्न्या जारः स **आयसे** लोह**शयने** **तप्ते** ऽग्निसमे कृते दाहयितव्यः । तत्र च शयनस्थितस्य काष्ठानि वध्यघातिनो **ऽभ्यादध्युर्** उपरि क्षिपेयुः । यावत् काष्ठप्रहारैर् अग्निज्वालाभिः शयनतापेन च मृतः ॥ ८.३७२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The paramour of the woman spoken of in the preceding verse shall be
burnt to death on an iron-bed made hot like fire.

Over him thus lying on the bed the executioners shall throw logs of
wood, till he dies by the heat and by the strokes of the logs.—(372)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 857), which adds that this
applies to men other than Brāhmaṇas;—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 39), which
explains ‘*abhyādadhyuḥ*’ as ‘should scatter round him’—and adds that
this is to be done by the executioners.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata* (12.165.65).—(Same as Manu, but reading ‘*unnayet*’ for
‘*dāhayet*’)

*Gautama* (23.15).—‘If a man of inferior caste commits adultery with a
woman of a superior caste, the King shall put him to death.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (21.1-5).—‘If a Śūdra approaches a female of the Brāhmaṇa
caste, the King shall cause him to be tied up in *Vīraṇa* grass and
thrown into fire. Of the woman, he shall have the hair shaved and the
body anointed with butter; then placing her naked on a donkey, he shall
cause her to be conducted along the public road; it is declared that by
this she becomes purified. If a Vaiśya approaches a female of the
Brāhmaṇa caste, the King shall have him tied up in *Lohita* grass and
thrown into fire;—\[the woman is to be dealt with as above\]. If a
Kṣatriya approaches a female of the Brāhmaṇa caste, the King shall have
him tied up in the leaves of *Śara* grass and thrown into fire; \[the
woman is to be dealt with as above\], A Vaiśya offending with a Kṣatriya
woman shall be dealt with in the same manner; so also a Śūdra offending
with a Vaiśva or Ksatriya woman.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अनयैव संगृहीतस्यायं विधिः । अन्यस्य तु यथोक्त एव दण्डः स्यात् ॥ ८.३७१ ॥

_तच् च दर्शयति ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

372	Let him cause the male offender to be burnt on a red-hot iron bed; they shall put logs under it, (until) the sinner is burned (to death).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/373_saMvatsarAbhishastasya_duShTasya.md">
<details open><summary><h3>373 संवत्सराभिशस्तस्य दुष्टस्य ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

संवत्सराभिशस्तस्य  
दुष्टस्य द्विगुणो दमः [मेधातिथिपाठः - संवत्सरे ऽभिशस्तस्य] ।  
व्रात्यया सह संवासे  
चाण्डाल्या तावद् एव तु  ॥ ८.३७३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/373_saMvatsarAbhishastasya_duShTasya.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the convicted man is accused again within a year, he shall be punished with a double fine. the same also in the case of intercourse with a ‘vrātyā’ or a ‘chāṇḍālī.’—(373)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अभिशस्तस्** तत्पापकारीत्य् अभिशब्दितः । यो यस्यां स्त्रियां संगृहीतः सो **ऽभिशस्तो** दण्डितः । स चेत् संवत्सरं प्रतिपाल्य,[^२६७] अतीते **संवत्सरे** पुनस् तस्याम् एव संगृह्यते तदा तस्यैकं वारम् अभिशस्तस्य **संवत्सरे** गते पुनर् दुष्टस्य द्विगुणो दण्डः ।


[^२६७]:
     M G: saṃvatsaraḥ pratipālyaḥ

**संवत्सराभिशस्तस्येति** समासपाठे कथंचिद् योजना ।   

**व्रात्यया सह संवासे** तावद् एव । किं यावद् एव पुनर् दुष्टस्य । नेति ब्रूमः । तत्राप्य् उत्तमाधममध्यमानाम् अनेकविधो दण्डः । तत्र को ऽसाव् इह । द्विगुण इति न ज्ञायते । किं तर्हि, **चाण्डाल्या संवासे** यावद् एव **तावद् एव** **व्रात्ययेति**, "सहस्रं त्व् अन्त्यजस्तेयम्" (म्ध् ८.३८५) इति । व्रातः पूगः संघः, तेन चरन्ती[^२६८] पुंश्चलीति कथंचिद् यः कर्तव्यः[^२६९] । अथ वा[^२७०] व्रातम् अर्हति व्रात्येत्य् अस्तु, यकारो दण्डादिः[^२७१] (पाण् ५.१.६६) । का च व्रातम्[^२७२] अर्हति । यानेकपुरुषोपभोग्या पुंश्चली सा हि पुरुषव्रातम् अर्हति । अथ वानेकपुरुषस्वामिका ग्रामस्य[^२७३] दास्यश् च व्रात्याः । ये तूद्वाहहीनां व्रात्यां[^२७४] मन्यन्ते, तेषां मते न मुख्यः शब्दार्थः । अयं हि व्रात्यशब्दः स्मृतिकारैः सावित्रीपतितेषु प्रयुक्तः । न च स्त्रीणां तत्संभवः । अथ स्त्रीणां विवाहस्य तदापत्तिवचनाद् उपनयनम्, तद्धीनपुरुषवद् व्रात्या, गौणस् तर्हि न मुख्यः । यदि नामोपनयनशब्दो ऽनुपनयने विवाहे प्रयुक्तस् तथाप्य् उपनयनहीनो व्रात्य इत्य् उक्ते न विवाहहीन इति प्रतीयते । तथासिंहो ऽयं देश इत्य् उक्ते न सिंहशब्दस्य माणवके प्रयुक्तस्यापि देशस्यामाणवकत्वं प्रतीयते । अस्ति तत्र मुख्य इहासंभव इति चेत्, नासंभवमात्रनिबन्धना गौणी प्रतीतिः । किं तर्हि, संबन्धम् अपरम् उपेक्ष्य । भवेद् उपनयनशब्दो विवाहे गौणः । व्रात्यशब्दस् तु गौण इति को हेतुः । गौणत्वे ऽपि विवाहाभावनिबन्धन इति दुरुपपदम्[^२७५] । व्रात्यजापि — काकाज् जातः काकः श्येनाज् जातः श्येन इति — व्रात्येति शङ्क्यते । बहुसंबन्धप्रत्यासत्त्या[^२७६] हि तत्र रूपातिदेशप्रतिपत्तिः । व्रात्यभार्या तु सत्य् अपि संबन्धे न व्रात्यशब्देन शक्याभिधातुम् । सो ऽयम् इत्य् अभिसंबन्धे हि "पुंयोगाद् आख्यायाम्" (पाण् ४.१.४८) इति तथा भवितव्यम् । तावतश् चायं भेदविवक्षायां तद्धितेनेति । तस्माद् यदि गौणो व्रात्यशब्दो गृहीतव्यस् तज्जाता प्रत्येया[^२७७] । अथ शब्दार्थे व्रातम् अर्हतीति । विवाहभ्रष्टा तु न मुख्या न गौणीति । न च विवाहकालः स्त्रीणां नियतो यत् कालाद् भ्रष्टा व्रात्याः स्युः । यद् अपि प्राग् ऋतोर् विवाह्याः तद् अपि स्वयंवरस्य ऋतुमत्या विना तत् परेणाभ्यनुज्ञात एव कामम् आ मरण्ं तिष्ठेद्[^२७८] गृहे कन्या[^२७९] ॥ ८.३७३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Convicted*’—charged of the crime; when a man has committed adultery
with a woman and has been punished, he is said to be ‘*convicted*.’

If such a man, within a year, commits adultery with the same woman, then
the man being thus convicted and accused again, the fine shall be
double.

Another reading is ‘*saṃvatsarābhiśastasya*’ in the compounded form. In
this case also the passage may be construed somehow.

‘“*The same also in the case of intercourse with a* “*vrātyā*,”’—that
is, when accused again.

Such cannot be the meaning of the verse, we say. In the case of the
intercourse in question, there are hound to be various grades of
punishment, in the shape of the ‘lowest,’ the ‘middle’ and the ‘highest’
amercement. So that it is not clear the ‘double’ of which one is meant.

What therefore is meant by ‘the same’ is that the line in the case of
intercourse with the ‘*vrātyā*’ is to be ‘the same’ as that in that of
the ‘*caṇḍālī*’; and for the latter case, the tine of ‘one thousand’ has
been prescribed under 385, below.

‘*Vrātyā*.’—‘*Vrāta*’ means *host, crowd*; so that the ‘*vrātyā*’ would
be *one who has intercourse with a large number of men*; the term being
explained etymologically as ‘*vrātena charati*’; or it may be explained
as ‘*vrātam arhati*,’ the *ya* in the middle coming in in accordance
with Pāṇini, 5.1.66. Who would be the woman that would be ‘*vrātyā*’ in
this latter sense? The unchaste woman who has intercourse with several
men; for it is only she that can be said to be *fit for a host*,’
(‘*vrātam arhati*’).

Or, the term ‘*vrātyā*’ may stand for the village slave-girl, who has
several masters.

Some people explain ‘*vrātyā*’ as meaning *unmarried*.

But according to this view the term would not be held to be used in its
primary sense. For the writers on *Smṛti* have used the term in the
sense of ‘those who have fallen off from the Sāvitrī’; and this cannot
he applicable to women.

“But for the woman marriage has been declared to be the substitute for
*upanayana* (initiation into Sāvitrī). So that she who has not been
married, would be a ‘*vrātyā*.’”

But in that case the term would be used in the figurative, not the
primary, sense. Even though the term ‘*upanayana*’ has been used in the
sense of *marriage*, which is *not-upanayana*, yet when it is declared
that ‘the man who is devoid of the *upanayana* is called a *vrātya*,’ it
is never understood to mean that the man *devoid of marriage* is meant.
Just as when it is said that ‘this place is without a lion,’ it is never
understood to mean that ‘the place is without the boy,’—eveu though the
term ‘lion’ may have been figuratively used for the ‘boy.’

“In the latter case there is possibility of the primary moaning of the
term ‘lion’ being applicable, but in the case in question, there is no
such for the term ‘*upanayana*.’”

Figurative use does not depend entirely upon the impossibility of the
primary meaning; it stands in need of other attendant circumstances
also.

Then again, there is no doubt that the term ‘upana yana’ in the sense of
*marriage* can be only figurative; but what reason can there be for
regarding the term ‘*vrātyā*’ also (in the present text) as figurative?
Even though it be figurative, it will he difficult to explain this as
being based upon the fact of there being no marriage.

Further, it may be supposed that the woman born of a *vrātya*,’ is also
a *vrātyā* on the analogy of the bird born of a *crow* being a *crow*,
and that born of the *kite* being a kite. And the term ‘*vrātyā*’ would
he applicable to the child by its relationship to the ‘*vrātyā*’ (the
nominal affix denoting this relationship).

“But the wife of the *vrātya* man cannot be called a ‘*vrātyā*,’ even
though she bear a *relationship* to him.”

But in the case cited the difficulty would be due to the case coming
under Pāṇini’s Sūtra 4.1.18 (by which the feminine form would be
‘*vrātyī*’). The case of ‘the child born of the Vrātyā woman’ however
does not come under this *Sūtra*.

Thus then, if the term ‘*vrātyā*’ is to be taken in a figurative sense,
it is to be understood to stand for ‘the woman born of a *vrātyā*
woman.’ If on the other hand, the term is used in its primary sense,
then it must mean ‘*she who is fit for a vrāta* or crowd,’—The
‘*unmarried woman*’ on the other hand does not come in either as the
primary or the figurative meaning. Further, there is no time fixed for
the marriage of women, by transgressing which they would become *vrātyā*
(in the sense in which the man transgressing the time-limit for
*Upanayana* becomes known as *vrātya*). As for the rule that girls
should be married *before puberty*,—its transgression also is permitted
by the sanctioning of the custom of ‘*Svayaṃvara*,’ ‘self-choice,’ which
can be done only when a woman is of a sufficiently advanced age, and
hence has attained puberty. And further, if no girl were to be married
after puberty, several girls would have to remain in their father’s
house till death.—(373).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Vrātyā*’—‘(*a*) A public woman, or (*b*) a woman who belongs, as
slave, to several men, or (*c*) ‘unmarried’ (the last being rejected)
(Medhātithi who is misrepresented by Buhler);—‘the wife of a person,
who, though of a twice-born caste, has not had his sacraments’
(Govindarāja 'and Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 394), which adds the
following explanatory notes:—If a man is found to persist in the
intercourse for one year, after having been convicted of it,—he should
suffer double the penalty prescribed for the first offence of its kind;
and the penalty should be enhanced in proportion to the period of
duration of the connection. ‘*Vrātyā*’ is the woman fallen from virtue,
who has abandoned all meritorious acts; but Halāyudha explains
‘*vrātyā*’ as a maiden that has passed her marriageable age.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Mahābhārata* (12.165.66).—‘On having intercourse with a *Cāṇḍāla*
woman, a man of the three higher castes shall he branded with the sign
of a headless body and banished; but the Śūdra shall be only branded. A
*Cāṇḍāla* approaching an *Ārya* woman shall be put to death.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यो यस्याम् अभिगृहीतः स चेत् संवत्सरे ऽतीते पुनस् तस्याम् एवाभिगृह्येत् तस्य यथोपदेशाद् द्विगुणो दण्डः कर्तव्यः । यस् तु संवत्सराद् अर्वाक् पुनर् अपि गृह्यते तस्य प्रथममासे द्वादशगुणो दण्डः एवं मासानुमासं भागह्रासेन तावद् दण्डप्रकॢप्तिः । यावत् संवत्सरे ऽतीते द्विगुणो दण्ड इति । एवं संवत्सराद् ऊर्ध्वं भागद्वादशभागह्रासेन मासानुमास एव दण्डः प्रकल्प्यः । यावद् एक एव भागो ऽवशिष्ट इति । एवं प्रत्यागमने यो दण्डः प्रकल्प्यते तस्याप्य् एषैव प्रकॢप्तिर् अनूद्यते । चण्डालीगमने च दण्डं वक्ष्यति "सहस्रं त्व् अन्त्यजस्त्रियम्" इति ॥ ३.३७२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

373	On a man (once) convicted, who is (again) accused within a year, a double fine (must be inflicted); even thus (must the fine be doubled) for (repeated) intercourse with a Vratya and a Kandali.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/374_shUdro_guptam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>374 शूद्रो गुप्तम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

शूद्रो गुप्तम् अगुप्तं वा  
द्वैजातं वर्णम् आवसन् ।  
अगुप्तम् अङ्ग-सर्वस्वैर्  
गुप्तं सर्वेण हीयते [मेधातिथिपाठः - अङ्ग-सर्वस्वी]  ॥ ८.३७४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/374_shUdro_guptam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A śūdra having intercourse with a twice-born woman, protected or unprotected, shall be deprived of his limb and his whole property, in the case of the unprotected woman, and of everything in that of the protected.—(374).
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^२८०]:
     M G DK (1: 1862): -sarvasvair

**शूद्र** आ चाण्डालात्, **गुप्तं वर्णं द्वैजातं** द्विजातीनां स्त्रिय **आवसन्** मैथुनेन गच्छन् रक्षिता[^२८१] भर्त्रादिभिः स[^२८२] नियमेन दण्ड्यः । को दण्ड इति चेत्, **अगुप्तां** चेद् गच्छत्य् **अङ्गसर्वस्वी** **हीयते** । अङ्गं च सर्वस्वं तद्वान्[^२८३] । केन **हीयते** । प्रकृतत्वात् ताभ्याम् एव, अन्यस्यानिर्देशात्, विशेषस्यानुपादानात् । अपराध्य्[^२८४] एवाङ्गम् । **गुप्तं** चेद् गच्छति **सर्वेण हीयते** । नैकेनाङ्गेन यावच् छरीरेणापि । हान्युद्देशेनाङ्गच्छेदनसर्वस्वहरणमरणान्य् उपदिष्टानि भवन्ति । हानिर् अस्य कर्तव्येत्य् अर्थः । तथा च गौतमः- "आर्यस्त्र्यबिगमने लिङ्गोद्धारः सर्वस्वहरणं च । गुप्तां चेत्" (ग्ध् १२.२–३) ॥ ८.३७४ ॥


[^२८४]:
     M G DK: aparādhānantaram


[^२८३]:
     M G: tadvat


[^२८२]:
     M G: dva; J omit: sa


[^२८१]:
     J: rakṣitāṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Śūdra*’—*i.e*., down to the *Caṇḍāla*;—‘*having
intercourse*’—sexual—‘*with a twice-born woman*’;—‘*protected or
unprotected*’—by her husband,—shall be punished according to law.

What shall be the punishment?

If he has intercourse with an unprotected woman, he shall be deprived of
his ‘*limb*,’ and also of ‘*his whole property*.’

As to the question regarding what he is to be deprived of, the answer is
provided by the epithet ‘*aṅgasarvasvi*,’ which mentions the ‘*limb*’
and the ‘*whole properly*’; especially as nothing else is mentioned, and
no other thing is specified.

The limb of which he is to be deprived is that with which he has
offended.

If he has intercourse with a ‘*protected*’ woman, ‘*he is to be deprived
of everything*,’— not of only one limb, but of the whole body.

The present verse lays down the amputation of the limb, the confiscation
of his entire property, and the inflicting of death, as forms of
punishment,—the sense being that punishment should be inflicted on the
man. Says Gautama (12.2):—In the case of intercourse with women, there
should be amputation of the generative organ and also the confiscation
of his entire property,—if she happens to be protected’—(374)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra p. 378), to the
effect that when a Śūdra has intercourse with an *unguarded* woman of a
higher caste, his organ is to be cut off and all his property
confiscated, and if he has recourse to a *guarded* woman of the higher
caste, he shall suffer death and his entire property shall be
confiscated.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 395), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Dvaijātam varṇam*’, a woman of the twice-born
caste,—‘*āvasan*’, having recourse to,—‘*aguptaikāṅgasarvasvī*’ (which
is its reading for ‘*aguptamaṅgasarvasvī*’), if the woman is one who is
*not guarded*, the man shall be deprived of one limb and also of his
entire property; and of his entire property as also of his entire body
(if the woman is one who is *guarded*).

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.280), which has the same explanation as
the one in para 1 above;—in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 100), which also has
the same explanation—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 156a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.374-378)**

[(See the texts under
372.)]

*Gautama* (12.2).—‘If a Śūdra has intercourse with an *Ārya* woman, his
organ shall he cut off, and all his property shall be confiscated.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.3.52).—‘Let him burn in straw-fire a Śūdra who has
intercourse with an *Ārya* woman.’

*Āpastamba* (2.27.9).—‘A Śūdra committing adultery with a woman of any
of the three higher castes shall suffer capital punishment.’

Do. (2-26.20).—‘If a man has actually committed adultery, his organ
shall be cut off, together with the testicles.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (21.1-5).—[(See under
372.)]

*Yājñavalkya* (2.286, 294).—‘If one has intercourse with a woman of the
same caste as himself, he shall be punished with the highest fine; if
with a woman of a lower caste, with the middle fine; if with a woman of
a higher caste, he shall be put to death and the woman’s ears and nose
shall be cut off. If a Caṇḍāla has intercourse with an Ārya woman, he
shall be put to death.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.40-43).—‘An adulterer shall be made to pay the highest
amercement, if he has had connection with a woman of his own caste;—for
adultery with a woman of a lower caste, the middle amercement. He who
has had connection with a woman of one of the lowest castes shall be put
to death;—as also for having connection with a woman of the highest
caste.’

*Nārada* (12.78).—‘Intercourse is permitted with a wanton woman who
belongs to another than a Brāhmaṇa-caste, or a prostitute, or a female
slave, or a female not restrained by her master; if these women belong
to a lower caste than oneself; but with a woman of a superior caste
intercourse is forbidden.’

*Bṛhaspati* (23.12).—‘The highest fine shall he inflicted for connection
with a woman of equal caste; half of that, for connection with a woman
of inferior caste; but a man who has connection with a woman of superior
caste shall be put to death.’

*Yama* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 395).—‘If a Śūdra has connection with a
Brāhmaṇa woman, the King shall put him to death on a heated iron-bed,
burning the sinful man there with wood, leaves and grass.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**एकाङ्गं** च प्रधानम् अत्र यद् अपराधसाधनं तत् प्रगृह्यते । तेनास्य हानिः कर्तव्या । गुप्ते तूभयेन हीयते । सत्य् अपि चाविशेषवचने वर्णानाम् औत्तमाधर्यवद् दण्डो ऽपि तथा स्यात्, यथान्यत्र । विषमसमीकरणं तु दण्डसामान्याद् अन्याय्यं स्यात् ॥ ३.३७३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

374	A Sudra who has intercourse with a woman of a twice-born caste (varna), guarded or unguarded, (shall be punished in the following manner): if she was unguarded, he loses the part (offending) and all his property; if she was guarded, everything (even his life).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/375_vaishyaH_sarvasva-daNDaH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>375 वैश्यः सर्वस्व-दण्डः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वैश्यः सर्वस्व-दण्डः स्यात्  
संवत्सरनिरोधतः ।  
सहस्रं क्षत्रियो दण्ड्यो  
मौण्ड्यं मूत्रेण चाऽर्हति  ॥ ८.३७५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/375_vaishyaH_sarvasva-daNDaH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Vaiśya should be fined his entire property after a year’s imprisonment; the Kṣatriya is to be fined one thousand, and be shaved with urine.—(375)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**वैश्यस्य** **सर्वस्वदण्ड** उक्तः । इह तु साहचर्यात् सत्य् अपि द्विजातित्वे न वैश्यस्य समानजातीयागमे दण्डो ऽयम्, किं तर्हि ब्राह्मणक्षत्रिययोर् एव । एवं **क्षत्रियस्य** ब्राह्मणीगमने **सहस्रं मौण्ड्यं** **च** **मूत्रेण । **उदकस्थाने गर्दभमूत्रं ग्रहीतव्यम् । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये व्याचक्षते । अन्यस्यानुपादानात् समानजातीय एव संवत्सरनिरोधनेन दण्डाधिक्यम् । यदि संवत्सरम् अवरुद्धं करोति ततो ऽयं दण्डः । 

<u>आद्यम्</u> एव तु व्याक्यानं न्याय्यम् । न च समहीनोत्तमानां कथं समदण्डत्वम् इति वाच्यम् । यत उक्तम् "सर्वेषाम् एव वर्णानां दारा रक्ष्यतमाः सदा" (म्ध् ८.३५९) इति ॥ ८.३७५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The confiscation of his entire property is the penalty prescribed for
the Vaiśya. Though all the twice-born castes are mentioned together
here, yet the penalty here laid down is not meant for the case where the
*Vaiśya* has intercourse with a woman of the same caste; it is meant for
cases of intercourse with *Brāhmaṇa* and *Kṣatriya* women.

Similarly in the case of the *Kṣatriya* having intercourse with a
*Brāhmaṇa* woman, the punishment consists in a fine of one thousand, and
also ‘*shaving with urine*,’—*i.e*., the urine of the ass being used in
place of water.

Others explain the verse as follows:—Since no other caste is mentioned,
the punishment is meant for the case where the Vaiśya has intercourse
with a woman of the same caste,—the additional punishment being due to
his *keeping her for a year*. The sense is that if he keeps her for a
year then his punishment shall be as here laid down.

As a matter of fact however, the former explanation appears to be more
reasonable. It cannot be argued against it that—“the same punishment
cannot rightly apply to cases of intercourse with equal, superior and
inferior castes;” because it has been declared that ‘the wives of all
castes are to be guarded with the greatest care.’—(375)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 396), which adds the
following explanatory notes:—For having recourse to a guarded Brāhmaṇa
woman, the Vaiśya is to be imprisoned for one year and his entire
property is to be confiscated,—the Kṣatriya is to be fined 1000, and
shall have his head wetted with urine and then shaved;—and in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 1009).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.374-378)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.374].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अनिच्छन्त्यां ब्राह्मण्याम् एवैतयोर् उभयदण्डः सामर्थ्याद् विज्ञेयः ॥ ८.३७४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

375	(For intercourse with a guarded Brahmana a Vaisya shall forfeit all his property after imprisonment for a year; a Kshatriya shall be fined one thousand (panas) and be shaved with the urine (of an ass).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/376_brAhmaNIM_yady.md">
<details open><summary><h3>376 ब्राह्मणीं यद्य् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ब्राह्मणीं यद्य् अगुप्तां तु  
गच्छेतां वैश्य-पार्थिवौ ।  
वैश्यं पञ्चशतं कुर्यात्  
क्षत्रियं तु सहस्रिणम्  ॥ ८.३७६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/376_brAhmaNIM_yady.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the Vaiśya and the Kṣatriya have intercourse with an unprotected Brāhmaṇa woman, the Vaiśya should be committed with five hundred and the Kṣatriya with one thousand.—(376)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अगुप्ता** व्याख्याता, भ्रष्टशीला अनाथा च । तद्गमने **वैश्यं पञ्चसतं कुर्यात्** । करोतिः प्रकरणाद् दण्डने वर्तते । दण्डयेद् इत्य् अर्थः । पञ्च शतान्य् अस्येति **पञ्चशतः**, बहुव्रीहिर् मत्वर्थीयः । तथा कर्तव्यं यथा पञ्च शतान्य् अस्य भवन्ति । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;किं यद् अधिकं तत् तस्यापहर्तव्यम् इत्य् अर्थः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;नेति ब्रूमः[^२८५] । तथा सति यस्य पञ्च वै शतानि धनं वा न्यूनं तस्य दण्डो न कश्चिद् उक्तः स्यात् । 


[^२८५]:
     M G: kramaḥ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;कस् तर्ह्य् अर्थः **पञ्चशतं कुर्यात्** इति । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;दण्डाधिकाराद् दण्डं पञ्चशतसंबन्धिनं कुर्यात् । 

एवं **सहस्रिणं क्षत्रियम्** इति । सहस्रम् अस्यास्ति दण्डः, न गृहे धनम् । "अङ्गसर्वस्वी" (म्ध् ८.३७४)इति व्याख्येयम्- तथा कर्तव्यं यथाङ्गं सर्वस्वं च तस्य दण्डो भवति । क्षत्रियस्याधिको दण्डो रक्षाधिकृतो रक्षति तत् पुनः स एवापराध्यति ॥ ८.३७६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Unprotected*’—has been explained as one who has lost her chastity and
has no one to look after her.

For having intercourse with such a woman, he shall ‘*commit*’ the Vaiśya
‘*with fine hundred*.’ The verb *to commit* is to be taken in the sense
of *fining*, from the context; the meaning is that ‘he shall be fined
live hundred.’

The term ‘*pañcaśutam*’ is to be expounded as ‘he who has live
hundred,’—the Bahuvrīhi compound denoting *possession*.

The meaning is that the king should so commit him that *he gets five
hundred*.

“Does this mean that if the man has more than five hundred, the excess
shall he confiscated?”

Not so, we reply; for in that case if the man has only five hundred,
then for him there would be no punishment prescribed.

“What I hen is the meaning?”

The expression ‘*he shall he committed with five hundred*’ means that he
is to be punished with a fine consisting of five hundred. That such is
the meaning is indicated by the context.

Similarly, ‘*the Kṣatriya is to be committed with one
thousand*’;—*i.e*., his punishment shall consist of one thousand; and
*not* that his property at home shall he one thousand.

The expression ‘*aṅgasarvasvī*’ (in verse 371) is to be explained
similarly to mean that (he king shall so act that the man’s punishment
consist of his limb and bis whole property.

The penalty for the *Kṣatriya* is severer, because it is his duty to
guard people; so that if he offends, his guilt is the greater.—(376)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This vérse is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 106);—in *Mitākṣarā*
(2.286); where *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds that in ‘*pañcaśatam*’ we have
*Bahuvrīhi* compound; and notes that the penalty for a *Kṣatriya* is
double that for a *Vaiśya*, because it is the function of the former to
protect and guard people from all kinds of harm; and that the fine of
500 prescribed for the Vaiśya is meant for that case where he does it
under the impression that the woman is a Śūdra, or for that where the
woman concerned is merely Brāhmaṇa by birth and is entirely devoid of
all Brāhmaṇical virtues.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 156a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.374-378)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.374].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

क्षत्रियस्य दण्डाधिक्यप्रयोजनम् उक्तम् "विदुषो ऽतिक्रमे दण्डभूयस्त्वम्" इति । अत्रापराधाभ्यासानुबन्धाद् वैतद् अस्य स्यात् ॥ ८.३७५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

376	If a Vaisya or a Kshatriya has connexion with an unguarded Brahmana, let him fine the Vaisya five hundred (panas) and the Kshatriya one thousand.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/377_ubhAv_api.md">
<details open><summary><h3>377 उभाव् अपि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

उभाव् अपि तु ताव् एव  
ब्राह्मण्या गुप्तया सह ।  
विप्लुतौ शूद्रवद् दण्ड्यौ  
दग्धव्यौ वा कटाग्निना  ॥ ८.३७७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/377_ubhAv_api.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But both these, when offending against a protected Brāhmaṇa woman, should be punished like a Śūdra, or burnt in a fire of dry grass.—(377)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**ताव् एव** क्षत्रियवैश्यौ **गुप्तया ब्राह्मण्या विप्लुतौ** कृतमैथुनौ मैथुनप्रवृत्ताव् एव शूद्रवद्[^२८६] दण्ड्यौ "गुप्तं[^२८७] सर्वेण हीयते" इति । **दग्धव्यौ वा कटाग्निना** । **वा**शब्दो वधप्रकारविकल्पे न वधविकल्पे[^२८८] । न हि शूद्रस्य गुप्ते[^२८९] वधाद् अन्यो दण्ड आम्नातः ॥ ८.३७७ ॥


[^२८९]:
     M G: śūdragupte; J: śūdrasyāgupte (but Jha's translation presupposes gupte)


[^२८८]:
     M G: vadhaprakāravikalpe vadhavikalpena; DK: vadhaprakāravikalpe vadhavikalpe na


[^२८७]:
     M G DK: gupte


[^२८६]:
     M G: vipraśūdravad; DK: viprāśūdravad
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Both these*,’ *i.e*., the *Vaiśya* and the *Kṣatriya*—‘*offending
against*’—*i.e*., having sexual intercourse with—a protected Brāhmaṇa
woman—‘*should he punished like the Śūdra*,’—*i.e*. ‘deprived of
everything, if the woman is protected’ (as declared in 374).

‘*Or he should be burnt in a fire of dry grass*’—the term ‘or’ is meant
to indicate option in the *method of killing*, and not in regard to the
*killing* itself. Because in the case of the protected Brāhmaṇa woman,
there is no other penalty for the *Śūdra* except death—(377)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra p. 318);—in
*Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 106);—and in *Mitāk* *ṣarā* (2.286), where
*Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the following notes:—If a Kṣatriya or a Vaiśya have
intercourse with a guarded Brāhmaṇa woman, he should be punished like a
Śūdra, *i*. *e*., deprived of his whole body and his entire property
(according to 374); *i.e*., his entire property should be confiscated
and he should be put to death;—another alternative penalty prescribed is
that he should be put to death, without any confiscation of property;
and it is by means of the ‘*Kaṭāgni*’ that he is to be put to death.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 155b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.374-378)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.374].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अयं तु **कटाग्निना** दाहः शूद्रदण्डस्य वैकल्पिकस् ततो ज्ञेयः ॥ ८.३७६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

377	But even these two, if they offend with a Brahmani (not only) guarded (but the wife of an eminent man), shall be punished like a Sudra or be burnt in a fire of dry grass.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/378_sahasram_brAhmaNo.md">
<details open><summary><h3>378 सहस्रम् ब्राह्मणो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सहस्रं ब्राह्मणो दण्ड्यो  
गुप्तां विप्रां बलाद् व्रजन् ।  
शतानि पञ्च दण्ड्यः स्याद्  
इच्छन्त्या सह संगतः  ॥ ८.३७८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/378_sahasram_brAhmaNo.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa who has intercourse with a protected Brāhmaṇa woman by force should be fined one thousand; he who has connection with a willing one, should be fined five hundred.—(378)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**गुप्ता** भ्रष्टशीलापि यदि केनचिद् रक्ष्यते पित्रा भ्रात्रा बन्धुभिर् वा तां हठाद् गच्छन् **सहस्रं ब्राह्मणो** दाप्यः । गुप्ता शीलवती चेत् प्रवासनाङ्कने ऽधिके[^२९०] । अथापि शीलवत्य् अपि गुप्तशब्देनोच्यते,[^२९१] तथापि सहस्रमात्राद् ब्राह्मणो मुच्यते[^२९२] । अङ्कनप्रवासने सर्वत्र मुखीक्रियेते परदाराभिमर्शे ॥ ८.३७८ ॥


[^२९२]:
     DK: na mucyeta


[^२९१]:
     DK: -śabdenocyeta


[^२९०]:
     M G: pravāsanāhvānenādhike; DK (1: 1858): cādhike
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Even though one has lost her chastity, if the woman continues to be
protected by her father, brother or relatives,—and a Brāhmaṇa has
intercourse with her by force, he should be made to pay one thousand.

If however the woman is protected and still chaste, then the man is to
be banished and branded, in addition to the fine.

Even if the word ‘protected’ be taken to mean *chaste*, the Brāhmaṇa
would be absolved by paying a thousand ‘banishment’ and ‘branding’ being
the general punishment laid down for all cases of immoral intercourse
with other women.—(378)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 317), which
remarks that this refers to cases where the woman is not the wife of
one’s teacher or friend;—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 393);—in
*Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 105), as laying down the penalty for forcible
intercourse with a chaste Brāhmaṇa woman;—in *Mitākṣarā* (p. 256) where
*Bālambhaṭṭī* notes that inasmuch as the latter half contains the
epithet ‘*icchantyā*,’ ‘willing,’—which is in contradistinction to
‘*balāt*,’ ‘by force,’ of the former half,—it follows that in case the
first half refers to the *guarded* woman, the second half must refer to
the *unguarded* one; the meaning being that if a Brāhmaṇa has connection
only once with a willing woman of the same caste, he should be fined
500;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 330);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
144b and 155b), which explains ‘*guptam*’ as ‘properly guarded’; and
adds that this refers to cases of adultery other than those with the
wife of the *guru* or the *friend*, for which latter other penalties
have been prescribed.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.374-378)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.374].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**बलाद्** इत्य् अविवक्षितम् । यो हि गुप्तां व्रजति बलाद् एवासौ गतो भवति । एवं सकामाम् अकामाम् इत्य् अन्यत्र गुप्तागुप्तव्यपदेशो विवक्षितः । ऋज्व् अन्यत् ॥ ८.३७७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

378	A Brahmana who carnally knows a guarded Brahmani against her will, shall be fined one thousand (panas); but he shall be made to pay five hundred, if he had connexion with a willing one.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/379_mauNDyam_prANAntikam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>379 मौण्ड्यम् प्राणान्तिकम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

मौण्ड्यं प्राणान्तिकं दण्डो  
ब्राह्मणस्य विधीयते [मेधातिथिपाठः - प्राणान्तको][म्ऽस् चोम्  
रेफ़ेर्स् तो थे रेअदिन्ग् ओफ़् "प्राणान्तिक-"] ।  
इतरेषां तु वर्णानां  
दण्डः प्राणान्तिको भवेत् [मेधातिथिपाठः - प्राणान्तको]  ॥ ८.३७९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/379_mauNDyam_prANAntikam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Tonsure has been prescribed as the death-penalty for the Brāhmaṇa; for other castes the penalty would be actual death.—(379)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यत्र क्षत्रियादीनां वध उक्तस् तत्र ब्राह्मणस्य **मौण्ड्यम्** । यथा "अब्राह्मणः संग्रहणात् प्राणानतं दण्डम् अर्हति" (म्ध् ८.३५९), तथा तु "पुमांसं दाहयेत्" (म्ध् ८.३७२) इति । प्राणानाम् अन्तं गच्छति प्राणान्तं वा करोति **प्राणान्तकः** । "अन्येष्व् अपि दृश्यते" (पाण् ३.२.१०१) इति ण्वुल्[^२९३] । <u>अन्ये तु</u> "प्राणान्तिक" इति पाठान्तरम् । प्राणान्ते भवः प्राणान्तिकः अध्यात्मादित्वाट् ठञ् ।


[^२९३]:
     M G DK: daṇḍaḥ

**इतरेषां** ब्राह्मणाद् अन्येषां क्षत्रियादीनां **वर्णानां** प्राणान्तिक एव श्रुतं मारणादिपूर्वम् एव । तदनन्तरम् इदम् उच्यते । उच्यमानं **मौण्ड्यं** तच्छेषतया सहस्रं दण्डो विधीयत इति मन्यन्ते । अन्यथा ब्राह्मणस्य प्राणान्तदण्डविधानात् कः प्रसङ्गो ब्राह्मणस्य येनैवम् उच्यते **मौण्ड्यं प्राणान्तिक** इति । "पुमांसं दाहयेत्" (म्ध् ८.३७२) इति सामान्यविधानप्रसक्तम् इति चेत्, तत्रैव कर्तव्यं स्यात् तथा हि स्फुटं तद्विषयत्वं प्रतीयेत[^२९४] ॥ ८.३७९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In cases where ‘death’ has been laid down for the *Kṣatriya* and other
castes, it is to be ‘tonsure’ for the Brāhmaṇa. For instance, for
adultery, the non-Brāhmaṇa deserves the death-penalty,—the general rule
being that ‘the male shall be flayed.’

The term ‘*prāṇāntaka*’ is to be explained as *prāṇānām antam gacchati*
or ‘*prāṇānāmant?m karoti*,’—*that which brings about the end of life*;
the form being formed with the ‘*ṇvul*’ affix.

Others read ‘*prāṇāntika*’;—in which case the affix is ‘*ṭhañ*,’—the
meaning being ‘relating to death.’

‘*For the other castes*’—the *Kṣatriya* and others, except the
*Brāhmaṇa*,—‘*it is to be actual death*.’

*Putting to death* having already been prescribed before, the present
text has been taken as serving the purpose of putting forward the
injunction of tonsure and the fine of one thousand, as supplementary to
the former injunction. Otherwise, in as much as the death penalty has
not been prescribed for the *Brāhmaṇa*, what would be the occasion for
declaring that ‘Tonsure is the death-penalty for the Brāhmaṇa?’

It might be argued that the possibility of death-penalty for the
Brāhmaṇa is indicated by the general law that ‘the man should be
flayed.’”

But in that case the substitute should have been put forward in that
same connection; so that the connection of the two could be clearly
perceived.—(379).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 393), which adds the
explanation that ‘for an offence in connection with which death penalty
has been prescribed, the Brāhmaṇa shall only have his head shaved’;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 399);—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p.
159);—in *Aparārka* (p. 681), which adds that *banishment from the city*
and such other penalties are equal to the death-penalty, so far as the
Brāhmaṇa is concerned;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 115);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 58b).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.379-381)  
**

*Gautama* (8.13).—‘The Brāhmaṇa who is well-versed in his *dharma* must
not be subjected to corporal punishment; he must not be imprisoned; he
must not be fined; he must not be exiled; he must not be reviled; he
must not be excluded.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.18.17).—‘A Brāhmaṇa, forsooth, shall not suffer corporal
punishment for any offence.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.2-3).—‘In the case of a Brāhmaṇa, no corporal punishment must
be inflicted; a Brāhmaṇa must be banished from the country, his body
having been branded.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 41, 42).—‘On no account shall the King kill a Brāhmaṇa,
though convicted of all possible crimes. He may be banished. The King
shall confiscate his entire wealth or leave him a fourth part for
himself.’

*Bṛhaspati* (27.11, 12).—‘A Brāhmaṇa, though a mortal sinner, shall not
suffer capital punishment; the King shall banish him and cause him to be
branded and shaved; the Brāhmaṇa who deserves capital punishment shall
be compelled to pay one hundred *Suvarṇas*; one deserving to have a limb
cut off, half as much; and one deserving to have the thumb and index
finger cut off, half of that.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 634).—‘Even if he has committed
heinous crimes, the Brāhmaṇa may be banished, branded, or made to
undergo expiations; for the Brāhmaṇa should not be made to suffer bodily
pain.’

*Hārīta* (Do., p. 631).—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, there is no cutting off of
limbs; the Brāhmaṇa is always purified by penances and austerities.’

*Yama* (Do., p. 636).—‘For crimes committed by the Brāhmaṇa, the
following punishments have been ordained: shaving of the head,
banishment from the city, proclamation of his sin, parading on an ass,
branding on the forehead.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सर्वत्र प्राणान्तिकेषु ब्राह्मणस्य मौण्ड्यं कर्तव्यम् । मुण्डयित्वा च **समग्रधनो ऽक्षतो** राष्ट्राद् बहिः कर्तव्यः । एवं सर्वाङ्गच्छेदनेषु ब्राह्मणस्य मुण्डनविवासने एव कार्ये । स्मृत्यन्तरे चाविशेषेण स्मर्यते- "न शारीरो ब्राःमणदण्डः" इति ॥ ८.३७८ ॥

_येनातः ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

379	Tonsure (of the head) is ordained for a Brahmana (instead of) capital punishment; but (men of) other castes shall suffer capital punishment.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/380_na_jAtu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>380 न जातु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

न जातु ब्राह्मणं हन्यात्  
सर्वपापेष्व् अपि स्थितम् ।  
राष्ट्राद् एनं बहिः कुर्यात्  
समग्र-धनम् अक्षतम्  ॥ ८.३८० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/380_na_jAtu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Verily he shall not kill the Brāhmaṇa, even though he be steeped in all crimes; he should banish him from the kingdom, with all his property and unhurt.—(380).
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सर्वपापेष्व्** इति प्रकरणविधौ न केवलं संग्रहणे ब्राह्मणो न हन्यते, यावद् अन्येष्व् अप्य् अपराधेषु । **अपि**शब्दो युगपत् सर्वपापकार्य् अपि **ब्राह्मणो न जातु** कदाचिद् धन्तव्यः । किं तर्हि, तस्य पापकारिणः कर्तव्यम् । **राष्ट्राद् एनं** विषयाद् ब्राह्मणं **बहिः कुर्यान्** निर्वासयेत् । **समग्रधनं** सर्वस्वसहितम्, **अक्षतम्** अक्षतशरीरम् । धनम् अप्य् अस्य नापहर्तव्यम् । कथं तर्हि दण्डो ब्राह्मणस्य ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;केचिद् आहुः । निर्वासने त्व् आधीयमानं सधनं निर्वास्य धनदण्डं प्रतिषेधति ।

<u>अन्ये</u> तु **समग्रधनं**[^२९५] हृतसर्वस्वं कृत्वा निर्वास्यत इति मन्यन्ते ॥ ८.३८० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*In all crimes*.’—What is said here should not, on the strength of
context, be taken as applying to ‘adultery’ only; it pertains to other
crimes also.

‘*Even*’—This term means that even though the Brāhmaṇa may have
committed all the crimes simultaneously, he should never be made to
suffer the death-penalty.

“What then should be done to the criminal?”

The king shall ‘*banish him*’—send him away—‘*from the kingdom*’—out of
his realm;—‘*with all his property*’—along with all his
belongings;—‘*unhurt*’—in body.

“If the property even is not to be confiscated, what would be the
punishment to the Brāhmaṇa?”

Some people say that when the text distinctly says that the man is to be
banished ‘with his property,’ it is clear that it forbids the imposition
of fine. Others however explain the words ‘banished with his property’
to mean that he shall be banished after all his property has been
confiscated.—(380)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 681), to the effect that even
though actual death has been prohibited as a penalty for the Brāhmaṇa,
yet there are other penalties which are equal to, and substitutes for,
that penalty;—again on p. 842, where it notes that the banishment here
laid down is meant for cases other than the ‘mortal offences.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 682);—in *Mitākṣarā* (2.81), which
remarks that corporeal punishment is never to be inflicted on the
Brāhmaṇa; this is the general law laid down here; and again on 3.267;—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 115);—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka*. (p. 183),
to the effect that for the Brāhmaṇa there is no death-penalty.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.379-381)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.379].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

_अस्यार्थवादः_ ।
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

380	Let him never slay a Brahmana, though he have committed all (possible) crimes; let him banish such an (offender), leaving all his property (to him) and (his body) unhurt.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/381_na_brAhmaNavadhAd.md">
<details open><summary><h3>381 न ब्राह्मणवधाद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

न ब्राह्मणवधाद् भूयान्  
अधर्मो विद्यते भुवि ।  
तस्माद् अस्य वधं राजा  
मनसापि न चिन्तयेत्  ॥ ८.३८१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/381_na_brAhmaNavadhAd.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

There is no greater crime on earth than the slaying of a Brāhmaṇa; the king shall, therefore, not even think of his death in his mind.—(381)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पूर्वशेषो ऽयम् अर्थवादः । **न ब्राह्मणवधाद्** अन्यो बहुतरो **ऽधर्मो** दुःखफलो ऽस्ति । अन्यशब्दाध्याहारेण पञ्चमी । **तस्माद्** धेतोर् **अस्य** ब्राह्मणस्य **राजा** मारणम् अङ्गछेदं वा **मनसापि** नेच्छेत् ॥ ८.३८१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This is a declamatory supplement to what has gone before; Than the
slaying of the Brāhmaṇa, there is no ‘*greater crime*,’—sin leading to
greater suffering.

The Ablative in ‘*vadhāt*’ is to be explained by supplying the term
‘*aṅgaḥ*.’

For this reason, the king should not even think of inflictin g either
death or amputation on the *Brāhmaṇa*.—(381)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 632);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 59);—in *Āparārka* (p. 681);—in *Mitākṣarā* (2.281);—and
in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 115).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.379-381)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.379].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रतिषिद्धस्य निन्दार्थवादो निवृत्त्यर्थः ॥ ८.३८० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

381	No greater crime is known on earth than slaying a Brahmana; a king, therefore, must not even conceive in his mind the thought of killing a Brahmana.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/382_vaishyash_chet.md">
<details open><summary><h3>382 वैश्यश् चेत् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वैश्यश् चेत् क्षत्रियां गुप्तां  
वैश्यां वा क्षत्रियो व्रजेत् ।  
यो ब्राह्मण्याम् अगुप्तायां  
ताव् उभौ दण्डम् अर्हतः  ॥ ८.३८२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/382_vaishyash_chet.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a Vaiśya approaches a protected Kṣatriya woman, or the Kṣatriya a Vaiśya woman,—both these deserve the same punishment as that in the case of an unprotected Brāhmaṇa woman.—(382)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**अगुप्ताया** **ब्राह्मण्यां**[^२९६] गमने "वैश्यं[^२९७] पञ्चशतं कुर्यात् क्षत्रियं सहस्रिणम्" (म्ध् ८.३७६) इति । तत्र वैश्यस्य पञ्चशतः[^२९८] । य एव परिपालयति स एव चेन् नाश्यति युक्तं तस्य दण्डमहत्त्वम् ॥ ८.३८२ ॥


[^२९८]:
     J: pañcaśataṃ


[^२९७]:
     M G: vaiśyaḥ


[^२९६]:
     M G J: brāhmaṇyā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

It has been said above (in 376) that in the case of approaching an
unprotected Brāhmaṇa woman, the Vaiśya ‘should be committed with five
hundred and the Kṣatriya with one thousand.’ So in the present case also
the fine for the *Vaisḥya* would be five hundred.

The heavier punishment for the *Kṣatriya* is justified on the ground
that being entrusted with the task of protecting the people, if he takes
to offending against them, he incurs a great sin.—(382)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 393), which remarks that
‘*daṇḍa*’, ‘punishment,’ meant here is the ‘middle amercement’;—in
*Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 106);—in *Aparārka* (p. 857), which remarks that
the meaning is that in the case of the Vaiśya having intercourse with an
unguarded Kṣatriya woman who is entirely corrupt, the fine is 500; while
if the woman is guarded and chaste, then death-penalty;—if the woman
belongs to the same cāste as himself, the penalty is the ‘highest
amercement.’

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.286);—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p.
319), to the effect that between the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya, if one has
recourse to the woman of the other caste, the penalty is a fine of 1,000
and 500 *paṇas* respectively;—and in *Vīramitrodya* (Vyavahāra 156a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.382-385)  
**

\[See Texts under
[371],
[372]
and
[374-378].\]
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

"वैश्यं पञ्चसतं कुर्यात्" इत्य् एवमाद्य् अगुप्तायां ब्राह्मण्याम् उक्तम् ॥ ८.३८१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

382	If a Vaisya approaches a guarded female of the Kshatriya caste, or a Kshatriya a (guarded) Vaisya woman, they both deserve the same punishment as in the case of an unguarded Brahmana female.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/383_sahasram_brAhmaNo.md">
<details open><summary><h3>383 सहस्रम् ब्राह्मणो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

सहस्रं ब्राह्मणो दण्डं  
दाप्यो गुप्ते तु ते व्रजन् ।  
शूद्रायां क्षत्रिय-विशोः  
साहस्रो वै भवेद् दमः [मेधातिथिपाठः - शूद्राया]  ॥ ८.३८३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/383_sahasram_brAhmaNo.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa having intercourse with the said two, when protected, should be made to pay a fine of one thousand; the fine for the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya approaching a Śūdra woman, should be one thousand.—(383)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^२९९]:
     J: śūdrāyā

**गुप्ते** क्षत्रियावैश्ये गच्छन् **ब्राह्मणः सहस्रं** दण्ड्यः । प्रवासनाङ्कने स्थिते एव । शूद्रायां[^३००] गमने क्षत्रियवैश्ययोः **साहस्रो** दण्डः । सहस्रम् एव साहस्रम्, स्वार्थिको ऽण् । सहस्रं वा अस्यास्ति साहस्रो दण्डो ऽन्यपदार्थः[^३०१] । मत्वर्थीयो ऽण् ॥ ८.३८३ ॥


[^३०१]:
     M G J: sahasraṃ vā (J adds: yasmin) daṇḍo 'sti sāhasro daṇḍo 'tra padārthaḥ


[^३००]:
     J: śūdrāyā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa approaching the protected *Vaiśya* or *Kṣatriya* Woman
should be fined one thousand; and of course ‘banishment’ and ‘branding’
remain as the fixed forms of punishment (in all cases of adultery).

For approaching a Śūdra woman, the *Kṣatriya* and the ‘*Vaiśya* should
be fined one hundred.

‘*Sāhasra*’ is the same as ‘*Sahasra*,’ the affix ‘*aṇ*’ having the
reflexive-force. Or ‘*Sāhasra*’ may be explained as *that which consists
of a sahasra or thousand*; the ‘*aṇ*’ affix having the force of the
possessive.—(383)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 393);—in
*Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 106), which remarks that this refers to the case
of a chaste woman;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 317);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 155b), which explains ‘*te*’ as ‘Kṣatriya
and Vaiśya’.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.382-385)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.382].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अवचनाद् अन्यस्य शूद्रायां गुप्तायाम् अयम् एव दण्डः स्याद् ब्राह्मणस्य ॥ ८.३८२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

383	A Brahmana shall be compelled to pay a fine of one thousand (panas) if he has intercourse with guarded (females of) those two (castes); for (offending with) a (guarded) Sudra female a fine of one thousand (panas shall be inflicted) on a Kshatriya or a Vaisya.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/384_xatriyAyAm_aguptAyAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>384 क्षत्रियायाम् अगुप्तायाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

क्षत्रियायाम् अगुप्तायां  
वैश्ये पञ्चशतं दमः ।  
मूत्रेण मौण्ड्यम् इच्छेत् तु  
क्षत्रियो दण्डम् एव वा [मेधातिथिपाठः - ऋच्छेत् तु]  ॥ ८.३८४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/384_xatriyAyAm_aguptAyAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

In the case of the Vaiśya approaching an unprotected Kṣatriya woman, the fine shall be five hundred; but the Kṣatriya may suffer tonsure or the fine.—(384)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^३०२]:
     M G DK: icchet

वैश्यस्य पञ्च शतानि दण्डः, अगुप्तां चेत्[^३०३] क्षत्रियां गच्छति । क्षत्रियस्य स एव । यदि वा मौण्ड्यं मुण्डनम् **ऋच्छेत्** प्राप्नुयाद् गर्दभमूत्रेण । एष एव वैश्यागमन उभयोर् दण्डः ॥ ८.३८४ ॥


[^३०३]:
     M G DK: ca
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

For the *Vaiśya* there shall be a fine of five hundred, if he has
intercourse with an unprotected *Kṣatriya* woman.

For the *Kṣatriya* also there shall be the same penalty; or he may
suffer ‘tonsure’—shaving of the head with ass’s urine.

The same punishment is applicable to both the *Vaiśya* and the
*Kṣatriya* for having intercourse with an unprotected *Vaiśya*
woman.—(384)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 396), which adds the
following explanation:—If a Kṣatriya has recourse to an unguarded
Kṣatriya woman, his head shall be wetted with urine and then shaved, or
he may be fined, like the Vaiśya, 500 *paṇas*. It adds that
*Lakṣmīdhara* has read ‘*mauṇḍyameva*’ for ‘*daṇḍameva*’;—and in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 1008).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.382-385)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.382].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

सर्वान्त्यश् चाण्डालो वर्णापसदः । तस्य स्त्री । अन्त्यजस्त्रीसंगमे ऽयं दण्डः । अविधानाच् च गुप्तागुप्तयोर् अविशेषेणायं दण्डः स्यात् । अथ वाधिकाराद् अगुप्तायाम् एव स्यात् । गुप्तायां तु विशिष्टतरः कार्यः ॥ ८.३८३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

384	For (intercourse with) an unguarded Kshatriya a fine of five hundred (panas shall fall) on a Vaisya; but (for the same offence) a Kshatriya shall be shaved with the urine (of a donkey) or (pay) the same fine.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/385_agupte_xatriyA-vaishye.md">
<details open><summary><h3>385 अगुप्ते क्षत्रिया-वैश्ये ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अगुप्ते क्षत्रिया-वैश्ये  
शूद्रां वा ब्राह्मणो व्रजन् ।  
शतानि पञ्च दण्ड्यः स्यात्  
सहस्रं त्व् अन्त्यजस्त्रियम्  ॥ ८.३८५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/385_agupte_xatriyA-vaishye.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa, approaching an unprotected Vaiśya or Kṣatriya woman, should be fined five hundred, and one thousand for approaching a woman of the lowest order.—(385)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

ब्राह्मणस्य क्षत्रियाद्यगुप्तास्त्रीगमन उभयोर् दण्डः । **अन्त्यजश्** चण्डालश्वपचादिः । तत्र **सहस्रम्** । तत्रायं सहस्रप्रणदण्डसंग्रहः । ब्राह्मणस्य चतुर्ष्व् अपि वर्णेषु गुप्तागमने सहस्रम् । श्रोत्रियदारेषु प्रवासनाङ्कने । अन्यत्र प्रवासानम् एव । श्रोत्रियडारेषु प्रायश्चित्तमहत्त्वाद् एव कल्प्यते । अगुप्तागमने[^३०४] पञ्चशतानि प्रवासनाङ्कने । यद्य् अप्य् अगुप्तापरदाराव्यपदेश्या[^३०५] भवति विवाहसंस्कारे सति, तथापि स्वैरिणी भर्तृस्वताम् अतिक्रान्ता, अब्राह्मणस्य प्राणान्तो गुप्तागमने दण्डो बलात् । सकामागमने साहस्रो दण्डः प्रवासनाङ्कने च । गुप्तागमने "वैश्यं पञ्चशतं कुर्यात् क्षत्रियं सहस्रिणाम्" (म्ध् ८.३७६) इति ॥ ८.३८५ ॥


[^३०५]:
     M G : -vyapadeśo


[^३०४]:
     M G: guptāgamane
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This is the punishment for the Brāhmaṇa having intercourse with a
*Vaiśya* or a *Kṣatriya* woman.

‘*Of the lowest order*’—*i.e*., the *Caṇḍāla*, the *Śvapaca* and so
forth. In their case the fine shall be one thousand.

The law relating to the fine of thousand ‘*paṇas*’ is briefly as
follows:—For the Brāhmaṇa approaching a protected woman of any of the
four castes, the fine shall be one thousand; and in addition to this for
having intercourse with the wife of a Vedic scholar there shall be both
banishment and branding, while in other oases there shall be banishment
only. We presume this to be the case with the wife of a Vedio Scholar on
the ground that the expiatory rite prescribed in connection with such
intercourse is of a serious character.

For intercourse with an unprotected woman, there shall be a fine of five
hundred in addition to banishment and branding.

Though the unprotected woman may he spoken of as ‘another man’s wife,’
on account of her having undergone the marriage-rites, yet, in reality,
when she becomes loose in her character, she practically ceases to
belong to her husband.

For the non-Brāhmaṇa, there is death-penalty if he approaches by force a
protected woman: for approaching a willing woman, he shall be fined one
thousand, and also banishment and branding;—as laid down under 376
above.—(385)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Antyajastriyam*’—‘Chāṇḍāla woman’ (Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Kullūka
and Rāghavānanda);—‘woman belonging to such castes as washermen,
cobblers, actors, basket-makers, fishermen, *Mādas* and *Bhillas*’
(Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 394), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Kṣatriyavaiśye*’ is the dual form in the
Accusative;—‘*antyajastrī*’, washerwoman and the like;—in view of what
is said here the death-penalty laid down elsewhere for having recourse
to the ‘*antyaja*’ woman should be understood as meant for men other
than Brāhmaṇas;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 1008);—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 108), which explains ‘*antyaja*’ as ‘the
washerwoman, the cobbler, and so forth.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.382-385)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.382].
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

385	A Brahmana who approaches unguarded females (of the) Kshatriya or Vaisya (castes), or a Sudra female, shall be fined five hundred (panas); but (for intercourse with) a female (of the) lowest (castes), one thousand.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/386_yasya_stenaH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>386 यस्य स्तेनः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यस्य स्तेनः पुरे नाऽस्ति  
नाऽन्यस्त्रीगो न दुष्ट-वाक् ।  
न साहसिक-दण्डघ्नो  
स राजा शक्रलोकभाक्  ॥ ८.३८६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/386_yasya_stenaH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

That king in whose town there is no thief, no adulterer, no defamer, no criminal, no assaulter,—attains the regions of Indra.—(386)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**यस्य** राज्ञः **पुरे** देशे राष्ट्रे **स्तेनश्** चौरो **नास्ति** स शक्रस्येन्द्रस्य लोकं स्थानं भजते स्वर्गं प्राप्नोति । नान्यस्त्रीगो, अन्यस्य या स्त्री भार्यावरुद्धा पुनर्भूर् वा, स्त्रीग्रहणम् अभार्याया अप्य् असंबन्धिन्याः प्रतिषेधार्थम् । **दुष्ट्वाक्** त्रिविधस्याक्रोशस्य कर्ता । **साहसिक** उक्तः । दण्डेन हन्ति दण्डपारुष्यकृत् । **शक्रलोकभाग्** इति सर्वत्रानुषङ्गः । स्तेनादीनां स्त्रीसंग्रहशेषो[^३०६] ऽयम् अर्थवादः ॥ ८.३८६ ॥


[^३०६]:
     M G: sarīrasaṃgrahaśeṣo; DK: sarīranigrahaśeṣo
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

That king in whoso ‘*town*’—kingdom—there is no thief, reaches the
‘*regions of Indra*’—heaven.

‘*No adulterer*’—who has no intercourse with a married woman, or to one
married a second time. The mention of the ‘*woman*’ indicates that the
prohibition applies to the case of all such women as are not one’s own
wife, and are not related to him.

‘*Defamer*’—the man who commits the three kinds of defamation.

‘*Criminal*’—already described above.

‘*Assaulter*’—who commits physical violence.

‘*Attains the regions of Indra*’—is to be construed with each of the
phrases.

This verse constitutes a hortatory supplement to the injunctions
regarding the punishing of thieves and others.—(386)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara*, (p. 408), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Duṣṭavāk*,’ defamer of people,—‘*daṇḍaghna*,’ one who
strikes people with a stick, *i.e*., an assaulter;—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 264).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.386-387)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (5.196).—‘The King in whose dominion there exists neither thief,
nor adulterer, nor calumniator, nor robber, nor murderer, attains the
world of Indra.’

*Cf*. The Upaniṣad text, where a king is represented as saying—‘In my
realm there is no thief, no miser, no drunkard, none who is not tending
the Fires, nor any illiterate person, no female libertine,—whence then
can there be any male libertine.’

*Yama* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 408).—‘Wicked persons, criminals, rogues,
gamblers, oppressors,—that King in whose realm these persons are not
found becomes entitled to the realm of India.’

*Nārada* (18.7-8).—‘Whenever wicked acts, opposed to the dictates of the
sacred law, have been committed, the King, after having reflected upon
the matter, shall himself inflict punishment upon those who deserve it.
What is opposed to revealed and traditional law, or injurious to living
beings, must not be practised by the King; wherever it is practised, he
must check it.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

_यतश् वैतद् एवम् अतः ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

386	That king in whose town lives no thief, no adulterer, no defamer, no man guilty of violence, and no committer of assaults, attains the world of Sakra (Indra).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/387_eteShAn_nigraho.md">
<details open><summary><h3>387 एतेषान् निग्रहो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एतेषां निग्रहो राज्ञः  
पञ्चानां विषये स्वके ।  
सांराज्यकृत् सजात्येषु  
लोके चैव यशस्करः  ॥ ८.३८७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/387_eteShAn_nigraho.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The suppression of these five in his own dominions secures to the king paramount sovereignty among his peers and fame in the world.—(387)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**साम्राज्यं** परप्राणयिता, स्वातन्त्र्यम् । **सजात्येषु** । समानस्पर्द्धिनो[^३०७] राजानः सजात्या अभिप्रेताः । तेषु मूर्द्धन्य् अधितिष्ठति, तस्याज्ञाकराः संबवन्तीत्यर्थः । **लोके च यशस्कर** कीर्तिम् उत्पादयन्ति[^३०८] । उभयत्रापि **निग्रह** एव कर्ता हेतुत्वात् । जनमारको ऽयं क्रोधन इति[^३०९] वदन्त्य् अपि तु स्तुवन्ति ॥ ८.३८७ ॥


[^३०९]:
     DK adds: na


[^३०८]:
     M G: ity utpādayanti; DK: khyātim utpādayanti


[^३०७]:
     M G: samānasyarddhino; DK (1: 1870): samāneṣu mūrdhani
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Paramount sovereignty*,’—lordship over others, independence.

‘*Among his* *peers*.’— the term ‘*peers*’ stands for such kings as are
his rivals. The king in question rises to lordship over all those;
*i.e*., they become subservient to him and obey bis wishes.

‘*Fame in the world*’—also is brought about.

In both cases it is the ‘suppression’ that brings about the said result.

The meaning is that people continue to eulogise the king, even though
they say that ‘he is a very cruel chastiser of the people.’—(387)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 408), which explains
‘*sajāteṣu*’ as ‘among persons of the same class with himself’;—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 264).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.386-387)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.386].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

निग्रहस्तुतिः श्लोकद्वयेन । प्रसङ्गाच् चेदम् अपरं साहसप्रकरण एवोच्यते ॥ ८.३८५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

387	The suppression of those five in his dominions secures to a king paramount sovereignty among his peers and fame in the world.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/388_RtvijaM_yas.md">
<details open><summary><h3>388 ऋत्विजं यस् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ऋत्विजं यस् त्यजेद् याज्यो  
याज्यं च र्त्विक् त्यजेद् यदि ।  
शक्तं कर्मण्य् अदुष्टं च  
तयोर् दण्डः शतं शतम्  ॥ ८.३८८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/388_RtvijaM_yas.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If a sacrificer forsakes an officiating priest, and if an officiating priest forsakes a sacrificer,—each being capable of doing the work and free from disqualifications,—their punishment is one hundred each—(388).
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यज्ञे कर्मकर **ऋत्विक्**, होतोद्गात्रादिः । यद्य् अपि वरणोत्तरकालम् आ प्रयोगसमाप्तेस् तद्व्यपदेशस् तथाप्य् अत्र प्रारब्धकर्मणोर्[^३१०] इतरेतरत्यागे न[^३११] विधिर् अयम्, किं तर्हि प्राग् वरणात् । भूतपूर्वगत्या ऋत्विग्व्यवहारः । यः प्रयोगान्तरे वृतः स एव शक्तः प्रयोगान्तरे ऽपि वरितव्यः । न केवलं पूर्ववृतस्यायम् अत्यागः, किं तर्हि तत्पित्रादिभिर् अपि । तथाहि "पूर्वो जुष्टः स्वयंवृतः" (न्स्म् ३.१०) इति नारदः । न चायम् ऐकपुरुषिको नियमः । किं तर्हि कुलधर्मो ऽयम् । तथा च महाभारते संवर्तमरुत्तीयेषु प्रपञ्चितम् । तेन तत्कुलाः[^३१२] पित्रादिभिर् ऋत्विजो वृतास् त एव वरीतव्याः । 


[^३१२]:
     M G DK: tatkusāḥ


[^३११]:
     M G DK (1:776) omit: na


[^३१०]:
     M G omit: prārabdha-

- याजनकानाम् अप्य् एष एव विधिः । तैर् अपि ते योजनीयाः । **ऋत्विजं** कृतार्त्विज्यं तत्कुलीनं वान्यं यो न वृणीत यियक्षुः, अपि त्व् अन्यं याजकम् अर्थयेत् । **शक्तं कर्मणि** यज्ञे प्रयोगज्ञम् **अदुष्टम्** अभिशंसनाङ्गवैकल्यादिभिर् दोषैर् अयुक्तम् । एवम् ईदृश एवर्त्विग् अर्थ्यमानो यदि नाङ्गीकुर्याद् याजकत्वम् **अदुष्टम्** एभिर् एव दोषैर् अनाक्रान्तं याज्यं **शक्तं** विद्वत्तया च । तादृशे त्यागे **तयोः शतं दण्डः** । ऋत्विक् शतं दाप्यो **याज्यं** त्यजन्, **याज्य ऋत्विजम्** । 

न केवलम् अयम् ऋत्विग्याजकधर्मः, शिष्याचार्ययोर् अपि । तथा च गौतमः- "अथायाजकाव्[^३१३] ऋत्विगाचार्यौ पतनीयसेवायां च हेयौ । अन्यत्र हानात् पतति" (ग्ध् २१.१२–१३) इति । दातृसंप्रदानयोर् अपि प्रतिग्रहे केचिद् धर्मम् इमम् इच्छन्ति ॥ ८.३८८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Officiating priest*’—a person who performs the several acts in
connection with ‘sacrificial performances’; *e.g*., the *Ṛtvik*, the
*Hotṛ*, the *Udgātṛ* and so forth.

Though the name ‘officiating priest’ becomes applicable to the man only
after his *appointment*, and continues so till the completion of the
rites, yet the law that is laid down here pertains to the forsaking done
before the actual *appointment*, and not to that during the performance
of the rites that have commenced. And the titles are applied on the
ground of past events; that is to say, it is only one who has had
previous experience; as a priest who has the chance of being chosen
again. In fact the title is applied, not only on the basis of previous
experience, but also upon hereditary qualifications; as says Nārada—‘the
man employed previously is self-chosen’; and further, this applies not
only to the experience of a single generation, but to the
family-traditions of several generations; as has been described in
detail in the *Mahābhārata* in the sections dealing with Saṃvarta and
Marutta.

The upshot thus is that those persons should be chosen as officiating
priests who belong to the same family members whereof have been chosen
in the past by the forefathers of the selector.

This same is applicable to the case of the ‘sacrifices’ also; the
priests also should hare recourse to the same sacrifices with whose
forefathers their forefathers may hare had dealings in the past.

‘*Officiating priest*’—the man who has performed the priestly duties, or
one who belongs to the family of such a person.

If a man going to perform a sacrifice does not appoint such a priest,
but ask some one else.

‘*Capable of doing the work*’—of sacrificing; *i.e*., conversant with
the entire procedure.

‘*Free from disqualifications*’—*i.e*., not haring any such defect as a
defective limb, or being accused of a serious crime and so forth.

If such a qualified priest, on being requested to officiate, refuses to
do so, and does not accept the priesthood offered;—when the sacrificer
is free from the said disqualifications and is fully learned.

In the case of both these forsakings, there shall be a fine of one
hundred. If the priest forsakes the sacrificer he should be made to pay
a hundred, and so also the sacrifices if he forsakes the priest.

This rule is applicable, not only to the case of the sacrificer and the
officiating priest, but also to that of the Preceptor and the Pupil. As
says Gautama (21.12-13)—‘The Priest and the Preceptor are to be forsaken
only if they are deficient in learning, or happen to serve an outcast;
by forsaking them otherwise one becomes an outcast.’

Some people hold that this law is applicable also to the case of the
giver and the recipient.—(388)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 122), which adds that
whether the fine is to be 200 or 100 is to be determined by the offence
being intentional or unintentional, and also by the richness or poverty
of the offender.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 837), which adds that this rule applies
to such priests as are hereditary, or have been appointed by the man
himself;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (91a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
120a).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

[\[See the Text under 206, et
seq.\]]
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

ऋज्वर्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.३८६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

388	A sacrificer who forsakes an officiating priest, and an officiating priest who forsakes a sacrificer, (each being) able to perform his work and not contaminated (by grievous crimes), must each be fined one hundred (panas).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/389_na_mAtA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>389 न माता ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

न माता न पिता न स्त्री  
न पुत्रस् त्यागम् अर्हति ।  
त्यजन्न् अपतितान् एतान्  
राज्ञा दण्ड्यः शतानि षट्  ॥ ८.३८९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/389_na_mAtA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Neither the mother, nor the father, nor the wife, nor the son deserve to be forsaken; he who forsakes these, unless they are outcasts, should be fined six hundred by the king.—(389)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**माता न त्यागम् अर्हति** । न त्याज्या । त्यागः स्वगृहान् निष्कासनां मातृवृत्तेः स्खलितायाः,[^३१४] उपकारस्योपक्रियायाम् उदितायाम् अकारणे । एवं पित्रादीनाम् अपि व्याख्येयम् । संबन्धसाहचर्यात्[^३१५] **स्त्री** भार्यैवाभिप्रेता । अपतितानाम् एषां त्यागो नास्ति । मातुस् तु "न माता पुत्रं प्रति पततीत्य् एके" इति शातातपः । भार्यायाश् चापि त्यागः असंभोगो[^३१६] गृहकार्यनिषेधः । भक्तवस्त्रादिदानं तु न निषिध्यते । "योषित्सु पतितास्व् अपि । वस्त्रान्नपानं[^३१७] देयं च वसेयुः स्वगृहान्तिके" (म्ध् ११.१८७) इति पठ्यते ॥ ८.३८९ ॥


[^३१७]:
     M G: vastrānnamānaṃ


[^३१६]:
     M G: saṃbhoge


[^३१५]:
     M G DK (1: 1627): saṃbandhe sāhacaryāt


[^३१४]:
     M G: saktāyā
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The mother does not deserve to be forsaken,—should net be cast off.
‘Forsaking’ consists in turning her out of the house, if she has failed
in her maternal duties; *i.e*., if she fails to do what she ought to do
in return for what she receives at the bands of her son.

The same explanation applies to the case of the father and the rest
also.

The term ‘*strī*’ (woman) stands for the *wife*, as is clear from the
fact that the text mentions only relatives.

These should not be forsaken, unless they are outcasts. As regards the
mother, Śātātapa has declared that ‘to the son the mother never becomes
an outcast.’

The ‘forsaking’ of the outcast, wife consists in giving up all
intercourse with her and in forbidding her to do household work; but the
giving of food and clothing is not forbidden; as it is declared
that—‘food and clothing should be given to even outcast wives, and these
should live near the house.’—(389)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 357), which notes that
‘*tyāga*,’ ‘abandonment,’ here means ‘not according such treatment to
them as has been prescribed in the scriptures’;—and that ‘*strī*’ here
stands for the *wife*.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 823), which remarks that this rule refers
to the abandoning of all the four collectively;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi*
(p. 154).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.163).—‘A husband forsaking a blameless wife shall be punished
as a thief.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.237).—‘Between father and son, brother and sister,
husband and wife, teacher and disciple,—if one forsakes the other,
unless he or she has become an outcast, he shall be fined one hundred.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Aparārka, p. 823).—‘The father and the mother should
never be forsaken; indeed no Sapiṇḍas possessing good qualities should
be forsaken; if one forsakes these arbitrarily, unless they have become
outcasts, he should he fined 200. Nor should one misbehave towards the
father, mother, or teacher; one who misbehaves towards them shall have
his limb cut off.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रायश्चित्तप्राप्ताव् अकुर्वन्तस् तानि त्याज्या न तु द्वेषादिना ॥ ८.३८७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

389	Neither a mother, nor a father, nor a wife, nor a son shall be cast off; he who casts them off, unless guilty of a crime causing loss of caste, shall be fined six hundred (panas).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/390_AshrameShu_dvijAtInAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>390 आश्रमेषु द्विजातीनाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

आश्रमेषु द्विजातीनां  
कार्ये विवदतां मिथः ।  
न विब्रूयान् नृपो धर्मं  
चिकीर्षन् हितम् आत्मनः  ॥ ८.३९० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/390_AshrameShu_dvijAtInAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For twice-born men disputing among themselves regarding any point relating to the orders, the king, desirous of his own welfare, shall not determine the law.—(390)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^३१८]वानप्रस्थादीनाम् अरण्याश्रमवासिनाम् **आश्रमेषु** **कार्यं** धर्मं संकटरूपम् — "अयं शास्त्रार्थः", "नायम्" — इति इतरेतरं विवदमानानां[^३१९] न धर्मव्यवस्थां सहसा **विब्रूयात्** प्रभुतया निर्णयम् अन्येषाम् इव न कुर्यात् । कथं तर्हि । वक्ष्यमाणेन प्रकारेण । एवम् **आत्मने हितं** कृतं भवति । शास्त्रार्थत्यागो न भवतीत्य् अर्थः । गृहस्थानाम् चाश्रमित्वे ऽपि यथोक्त एव निर्णयप्रकारः । **कार्यं** धमसंशयात्मकविवादपदम् । **आश्रम**ग्रहणाच् च विशिष्टविष्यता व्याख्यायते ॥ ८.३९० ॥


[^३१९]:
     M G: vivadamānāṃ


[^३१८]:
     DK (1: 1926) does not give the commentary on this verse
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In regard to the ‘duties’ of the various orders of the Hermit dwelling
in the forests, several disputes arise as to this and not that being the
sense of the scriptures.

When these men happen to dispute among themselves, the king shall not,
in a hurry, lay down the law; *i.e*., he should not, in the exercise of
his sovereign power, determine what the law on the point is. What he
should do and how is going to be explained later on.

By acting in this manner, the king accomplishes his own welfare; *i.e*.,
he does not relinquish the injunctions of the scriptures.

In the case of householders, even though they also belong to an
‘order,’—yet, the method of laying down the law should be the same as
laid down before (and not as declared in the present text, which
pertains to the Hermit and the Recluse only).

‘*Points*’—*i.e*., doubtful questions regarding the duties; that this
refers to this particular matter of *duties* is indicated by the mention
of the ‘orders.’—(390)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Āśrameṣu*’—‘The hermitages of Vānaprasthas and other hermits living in
the forest’ (Medhātithi);—‘the Householder’s and other life-stages’
(Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 4);—in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 10a), which explains ‘*āśrameṣu kārye*’ as ‘business arising
out of the life-stages’;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (10a), which explains
‘*āśrameṣu*’ as ‘in the matter of the life-stages’,—and ‘*na vibrūyāt*,’
as ‘should not apportion victory and defeat.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

तपस्विव्ध्यर्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.३८८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

390	If twice-born men dispute among each other concerning the duty of the orders, a king who desires his own welfare should not (hastily) decide (what is) the law.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/391_yathArham_etAn.md">
<details open><summary><h3>391 यथार्हम् एतान् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यथार्हम् एतान् अभ्यर्च्य  
ब्राह्मणैः सह पार्थिवः ।  
सान्त्वेन प्रशमय्यादौ  
स्वधर्मं प्रतिपादयेत्  ॥ ८.३९१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/391_yathArham_etAn.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Having, with the assistance of Brāhmaṇas, received them with due honour, the king shall, at first, pacify them with soothing words, and then explain to them their duty.—(391)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^३२०]यथा तत् कर्तव्यं तथेदानीम् आह । यो यादृशी पूजाम् अर्हति गुनानुरूपेण तं तथैव्**आभ्यर्च्य** **ब्राह्मणैर्** मन्त्रिपुरोहितादिभिः । अर्चायां साहित्यं[^३२१] धर्मप्रवचने वा । तदा च ब्राह्मणाः सत्या विज्ञेयाः । तैः **सह** **स्वधर्मं**[^३२२]** **न्याय्यम् अर्थं बोधयेत् । सिद्धे महत्त्वे सभ्येभ्य उपदेशः प्राधान्यार्थः । तान् पुरस्कुर्यात् । तथा हि । न राज्ञः क्रुध्यन्ति शास्त्रेण । प्रीतिस्तुतिवचनैः प्रथमं प्रशमय्य व्यपनीतक्रोधान्[^३२३] कृत्वा ततो ब्रूयात् ॥ ८.३९१ ॥


[^३२३]:
     M G: prathamam prathamam apy avyapanītakrodhān


[^३२२]:
     M G: svadharma-


[^३२१]:
     M G: ācāryasāhitye


[^३२०]:
     DK (1: 1927) does not give the commentary on this verse
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

What the king should do under the circumstances is now explained.

Having received each of the men with such honour as he deserves, by
reason of his qualifications,—he should, ‘*with the assiatance of
Brāhmaṇas*’—his ministers and priests,—this ‘assistance’ being rendered
in the *reception*, or in the explaining of duties. It is only in the
latter that the true character of the Brāhmaṇa becomes revealed.

With the assistance of these Brāhmaṇas, he shall explain to them their
duty.

The assistance of the Brāhmaṇas having been insisted upon, the
declaration that the king shall explain the duties is meant to indicate
the predominance of the king, who is to associate the Brāhmaṇas with
himself. And this predominance is due to the fact that kings never lose
their temper.

The king should explain the duties to them after having at first
‘*pacified them*’—*i.e*., having soothed their temper—‘*with soothing
words*’—affectionate and complimentary words.—(391)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (10a), which explains
‘*sāntvena praśamayya*’ as ‘having allayed all anger and ill-feeling by
means of conciliatory words;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 10a).
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

391	Having shown them due honor, he should, with (the assistance of) Brahmanas, first soothe them by gentle (speech) and afterwards teach them their duty.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/392_prativeshyAnuveshyau_cha.md">
<details open><summary><h3>392 प्रतिवेश्यानुवेश्यौ च ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

प्रतिवेश्यानुवेश्यौ च  
कल्याणे विंशतिद्विजे ।  
अर्हाव् अभोजयन् विप्रो  
दण्डम् अर्हति माषकम्  ॥ ८.३९२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/392_prativeshyAnuveshyau_cha.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If, at a festival where twenty twice-born men are invited, a Brāhmaṇa does not entertain his frontal and back neighbours, who are quite worthy,—he deserves to be fined one ‘māṣa.’—(392)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

विशन्त्य् अस्मिन्न् इति वेशो निवासः, तत्प्रतिगतः प्रतिवेशः[^३२५] गृहाभिमुखः,[^३२६] तत्र भवः **प्रतिवेश्यः**[^३२७] । आदिदीर्घपाठे[^३२८] स्वार्थिको ऽण् । एवम् **अनुवेश्यः** पृष्ठतो वसन्न् उच्यते[^३२९] । तौ चेन् न भोजयेत् । यदि स्वगृहम् आनीय **कल्याणे** विवाहाद्युत्सवे **विंशति**मात्रा यत्र **द्विजा** अन्ये भोज्यन्ते, तदा माषकं सुवर्णं दण्डं दाप्यः । हिरण्यम् इत्य् उत्तरत्र विशेषणाद् इहापि विज्ञायते । **अर्हौ** यदि तौ प्रतिवेश्यानुवेश्यौ[^३३०] योग्यौ भवतः, न द्विषन्तौ नात्यन्तनिर्गुणौ ॥ ८.३९२ ॥


[^३३०]:
     M G DK: prāti-


[^३२९]:
     M G DK omit: ucyate


[^३२८]:
     M G: prāgdīrghapāṭhe; DK: pradīrghapāṭhe


[^३२७]:
     M G DK: prātiveśyaḥ


[^३२६]:
     M G: pṛṣṭagṛhābhimukhas; J: gṛhābhimukhaṃ


[^३२५]:
     M G DK: prativeśyaḥ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Veśa*’ is that where people live, a dwelling-house; the house that is
in the front of one’s house is ‘*prativeśa*’; and he who lives in that
is the ‘*prativeśya*,’ ‘*frontal neighbour*’ If we read ‘*prātiveśya*,’
we would add the reflexive affix ‘*aṇ*.’ Similarly ‘*anuveśya* ‘is one
dwelling at the back of one’s house.’

Persons occupying houses on the two sides also are called ‘neighbours’;
hence the two terras ‘*prativeśya*’ and ‘*anuveśya*’ may be taken as
standing for persons occupying houses next, and on both sides, to one’s
own house.

If the man does not entertain these two, after having invited them to
the ‘*festival*’ in his house, in the shape of marriage and the
like,—‘at which *twenty other twice-born persons are invited*,’—then he
should be made to pay a fine of one ‘*māṣa*.’ That this ‘*māṣa*’ is to
be of gold is indicated by its being distinctly specified in another
place.

‘*Worthy*’;—if the frontal and back neighbours are both worthy,—*i.e*.,
neither inimical, nor absolutely unqualified.—(392)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Prativeśya-anuveśya*’—‘Neighbour living in front—neighbour living at
the back’ (Medhātithi);—‘the next neighbour and the neighbour next to
him’ (Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and Rāghvānanda).

‘*Māṣakam*’—‘Of gold’ (Medhātithi);—‘of silver’ (Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 358), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Kalyāṇe viṃśatidvije*,’ ‘at which twenty Brāhmaṇas
are entertained’;—at such a festival if one does not feed his front
neighbour and back neighbour,—both of whom are perfectly fit persons for
being entertained,—he should be fined one ‘*Māṣa*’ which should be
understood to be of *silver*, in view of the fact that Manu in the next
verse prescribes the *golden* ‘*māṣa*’ as the fine for the offence of
not feeding the neighbours at a rich entertainment.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.392-393)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (5.94-96).—‘A fine of 25 *Kārṣāpaṇas* should he inflicted for
neglecting to invite at a *śrāddha*, a Brāhmaṇa neighbour; also for not
offering him food after inviting him. He who, after having accepted an
invitation, does not eat, shall pay a fine of a gold Māṣaka to the King,
and double the quantity of food to the inviter.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.263).—‘If a Brāhmaṇa omits to invite his neighbours, he
shall be fined 15 *Paṇas*.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 835).—‘If a twice-born who is in the habit
of accepting gifts, fails to attend an invitation, he should be made to
pay a fine of 108.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

पार्श्ववेश्मानाव् अप्य् अर्थगृहीतौ विज्ञेयौ । अन्यस् तु पाठान्तरे ऽर्थम् आह्**आनुवेश्यस्** तदनुगामी । **प्रतिवेश्यस्** तत्सम्मुखः ॥ ८.३९० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

392	A Brahmana who does not invite his next neighbour and his neighbour next but one, (though) both (he) worthy (of the honour), to a festival at which twenty Brahmanas are entertained, is liable to a fine of one masha.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/393_shrotriyaH_shrotriyam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>393 श्रोत्रियः श्रोत्रियम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

श्रोत्रियः श्रोत्रियं साधुं  
भूतिकृत्येष्व् अभोजयन् ।  
तद्-अन्नं द्विगुणं दाप्यो  
हिरण्यं चैव माषकम् [मेधातिथिपाठः - हैरण्यं]  ॥ ८.३९३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/393_shrotriyaH_shrotriyam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Vedic scholar who does not entertain a worthy Vedic scholar at such auspicious rites, should be made to pay twice the quantity of that meal, and also a ‘māṣa’ of gold.—(393)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

अप्रातिवेश्यार्थो ऽयम् आरम्भः । सब्रह्मचारिणाम् अयं नियमः । **श्रोत्रियस्** तादृशम् एव **श्रोत्रियं** गुणवन्तं **भूतिकृत्येषु** — भूतिर् विभवस् तन्निमितेषु कार्येषु — विभवे धनसंपत्तौ सत्यां यानि क्रियन्ते गोष्ठीभोजनादीनि । अथ वा **भूति**ग्रहणं कृत्यविशेषणम् । भूतिमन्ति यानि कृत्यानि प्राचुर्येण प्रभूततया विवाहादीनि क्रियन्ते, यत्र विंशतेर् अधिकनरा भोज्यन्ते । तादृशेषूत्सवेषु अभोजयंस् तदर्थम् अन्नं भूतिकृत्येषु भोक्तव्यं तावद्**द्विगुणं** तस्मै दापयेत् । राज्ञे वा उभयं[^३३१] **हिरण्यं** **माषकं**[^३३२] वा[^३३३] ॥ ८.३९३ ॥


[^३३३]:
     J omits: vā


[^३३२]:
     M G: māṣako


[^३३१]:
     J: vā dātavyaṃ
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This text refers to persons who are not neighbours. The rule here laid
down pertains to fellow-students.

The Vedic scholar who does not entertain a duly qualified Vedic scholar
at such ‘*auspicious rites*’—rites performed by virtue of the possession
of wealth; such for instance as the feeding of many men and so forth; or
‘rich’ may be taken as an epithet of the ‘rites’; the meaning in which
case would be the rites, such as marriages and the like, which are
performed on a lavish scale; where more than twenty men are fed;—if at
such times, the Vedic scholar does not feed a fellow-scholar, ho should
be made to offer twice the quantity of the food that would be offered at
the rich rites; and one ‘*māsa*’ of gold shall be paid to the king as
fine.—(393)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Śrotriyam*’—‘Who is *not* a neighbour’ (Medhātithi);—‘a neighbour’
(Govindarāja, and Kullūka);—‘a resident of the same village’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 359), which adds the
explanation that the quantity of food that he might have eaten should be
made to be given to the uninvited man.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.392-393)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.392].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

> **श्रोत्रियः श्रोत्रियं साधुं भूतिकृत्येष्व् अभोजयेत् ।**

असमीपगृहम् अप्य् एकग्रामम् ।

> **तद् अन्नं द्विगुणं दाप्यो हैर्ण्यं चैव माषकम्  ॥ ८.३९१ ॥**

अर्हब्राह्मणातिक्रमदण्डो ऽयम् । **भूतिकृत्येष्व्** इति वचनाद् आरम्भसामर्थ्याच् च पूर्वस्मात् कल्याणान् महत्तरम् इदं विज्ञायते । एतौ च दण्डाव् अर्हादाने सति स्याताम् ॥ ८.३९१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

393	A Srotriya who does not entertain a virtuous Srotriya at auspicious festive rites, shall be made to pay him twice (the value of) the meal and a masha of gold (as a fine to the king).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/394_andho_jaDaH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>394 अन्धो जडः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अन्धो जडः पीठसर्पी  
सप्तत्या स्थविरश् च यः ।  
श्रोत्रियेषूपकुर्वंश् च  
न दाप्याः केन चित् करम्  ॥ ८.३९४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/394_andho_jaDaH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A blind man, an idiot, a cripple, an old man of seventy, and one who attends upon Vedic scholars should not be made to pay any taxes by any one.—(394)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**सप्तत्या स्थविरः** । प्रकृत्या विरूप इतिवत् तृतीया । सप्ततिर् वर्षाणि यस्य जातस्य स एवम् उच्यते । **श्रोत्रियेषु** वेदाध्यायिष्**ऊपकुर्वन्** पादशुश्रूषादिना कारुकर्मणा वा । एते **न केनचित्** "शिल्पिनो[^३३४] मासि मासि" (म्ध् ७.१३८) इत्यादि दाप्याः । क्षीणकोशेनापि न दाप्या[^३३५] इति **केनचिद्**ग्रहणम् ॥ ८.३९४ ॥


[^३३५]:
     M G: dātavyā


[^३३४]:
     M G: karmavat kāruśilpino
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*An old man of seventy*’;—the instrumental ending in ‘*saptatyā*’ is on
the analogy of such expressions as ‘*prakṛtyā virūpuḥ*.’ The man who has
passed seventy years of age is so called.

One who ‘*attends upon*’—serves, either with personal attendance, or as
a craftsman.

These men should not be made to pay any taxes,—snoh as working for the
king for one day in the month, as laid down for craftsman under 7.
138;—by a king, even when his treasury has become depleted. This is what
is meant by the phrase ‘*by any one*’— (394)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 272), which adds
the following notes:—‘*Pīṭhasarpī*’ is the
*lame*;—‘*śrotriyeṣūpakurvan*,’ he who accords to learned Brāhmaṇas
grain and monetary assistance.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Āpastamba* (2.26.16-17).—‘Blind, deaf and diseased persons, as also
those to whom the acquisition of property is forbidden, shall be free
from taxes.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

अब्राह्मणा अपि सन्तः ब्राह्मणा अपि वानर्हन्तः ॥ ८.३९२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

394	A blind man, an idiot, (a cripple) who moves with the help of a board, a man full seventy years old, and he who confers benefits on Srotriyas, shall not be compelled by any (king) to pay a tax.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/395_shrotriyaM_vyAdhitArtau.md">
<details open><summary><h3>395 श्रोत्रियं व्याधितार्तौ ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

श्रोत्रियं व्याधितार्तौ च  
बाल-वृद्धाव् अकिंचनम् ।  
महाकुलीनम् आर्यं च  
राजा संपूजयेत् सदा  ॥ ८.३९५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/395_shrotriyaM_vyAdhitArtau.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king should always respect the Vedic scholar, the sick and the distressed, the infant and the aged, the indigent, the man of high family and the gentleman.—(395)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**संपूजनम्** अनुग्रहः, अनेकार्थत्वाद् धातूनाम् । न हि **बाला**दीनाम् अन्या पूजोपपद्यते । **श्रोत्रियो** ऽत्र ब्राह्मण एवेति स्मरन्ति । **आर्तः** प्रियवियोगादिना । **अकिंचनो** दुर्गतः । **महाकुलीनः** । ख्यातिधनविद्याशौर्यादिगुणे कुले जातो **महाकुलीनः** । **आर्य** ऋजुप्रकृतिर् अवक्रः । एतेषां दानमानादिभिर् अनुग्रहः कर्तव्यः । 

<u>केचिद्</u> **अकिंचनं** महाकुलीनविशेषणं व्याचक्षते ॥ ८.३९५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Respecting*’ here stands for *kindly treatment*; verbal roots having
several meanings. No other kind of ‘respect’ would be possible in the
case of the infant and several others. The ‘*Vedic scholar*’ has been
held here to mean the Brāhmaṇa scholar only.

‘*Distressed*,’—by separation from his loved ones or such other causes.

‘*Indigent*’— in reduced circumstances.

‘*The man of high family*’—one who is born in a family endowed with
fame, wealth, learning, bravery and such other qualities.

‘*Gentleman*’—one who is honest and upright of nature.

All these should be received with kind treatment, in the shape of gifts
and honours.

Some people explain the term ‘*indigent*’ as qualifying ‘*the man of
high family*’— (395)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 252), which adds
the following notes:—‘*Sampūjayet*,’ honour them with presents; this
implies that he should not take anything from them.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (18.34-35).—‘Let a king be constantly intent on showing honour
to the Brāhmaṇas; a field furnished with Brāhmaṇas is the source of
prosperity of the world. A Brāhmaṇa may command respect and a
distinguished seat at the King’s court. In the morning, the King shall
show his face to, and salute, the Brāhmaṇa first of all.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**श्रोत्रियः** शास्त्रप्रसिद्ध्या ब्राह्मणो गृह्यते । व्याधितार्तबालवृद्धाकिंचना अश्रोत्रिया अपि सन्तः । **महाउलीनम्**, [सगुणकुलजातम्], **आर्यं च राजा संपूजयेत् सदा** । प्रकरणात् कराग्रहेण ग्रासाच्छादनेन वा स्थित्यर्थेन । कराग्रहणादिकेन तपस्विश्रोत्रियप्रसङ्गाच् चायं व्यवहारमध्ये कारुधर्म उच्यते ॥ ८.३९३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

395	Let the king always treat kindly a Srotriya, a sick or distressed man, an infant and an aged or indigent man, a man of high birth, and an honourable man (Arya).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/396_shAlmalIphalake_shlaxNe.md">
<details open><summary><h3>396 शाल्मलीफलके श्लक्ष्णे ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

शाल्मलीफलके श्लक्ष्णे  
नेनिज्यान् नेजकः शनैः ।  
न च वासांसि वासोभिर्  
निर्हरेन् न च वासयेत्  ॥ ८.३९६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/396_shAlmalIphalake_shlaxNe.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The washerman shall wash (clothes) gently on a smooth board of cotton-tree wood; he shall not carry clothes in other clothes; nor shall he allow them to be worn.—(396)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**शाल्मली** नाम वृक्षस् तद्विकारे **फलके** । स हि प्रकृत्यैव शल्क्ष्णो[^३३६] भवति । न च वाससो ऽपि पातैर् अवयवा अस्य च्यवन्ते । ते हि च्युता वासः पाटयेयुः । न चायं जातिनियमो ऽदृष्टाय[^३३७] । तेनान्यद्[^३३८] अपि यत् काष्ठम् एवंस्वभावं तत्फलके न दोषः । **श्लक्ष्णे** ऽपरुषे च । **वासांस्य्** अन्यदीयान्य् अन्यदीयैर् **वासोभिर् न निर्हरेत्** । बद्ध्वोपरिवेष्ट्य तीर्थे प्रक्षालयितुं न नयेत् । बन्धनाद् वाससां विनाशो मा भूत् । अधिकं हि तानि पीडितानि भवन्ति । **न च वासयेत्** । अन्यदीयानि वासांस्य् अन्यस्मै न प्रयच्छेत्,[^३३९] मूल्येन[^३४०] वसनार्थं न दद्यात् । एतद् धि वासनम्- वस्ते ऽपरः, तं रजको वासयति । अश्रुतत्वाद् दण्डस्य प्रकृतमाषकयोजना कर्तव्या ॥ ८.३९६ ॥


[^३४०]:
     M G DK omit: mūlyena


[^३३९]:
     M G: anyasmai prayacchan


[^३३८]:
     M G: yenānyad


[^३३७]:
     M G: dṛṣṭo


[^३३६]:
     M G DK (1: 1709): dṛḍho
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

the ‘*cotton tree*’ is a kind of tree; the board should be made out of
this tree; because its wood is naturally soft and ‘*smooth*,’ so th.it
when the clothes are beaten upon it, their component parts do not become
torn.

‘*Gently*’—so that the clothes being beaten do not become torn.

The injunction regarding the particular wood is not with a view to any
transcendental result; hence there would be nothing wrong in using any
other wood, if it satisfied the said conditions.

‘*Smooth*’—not rough.

‘*Clothes*’—belonging to one man,—he shall not ‘*carry*’— tie up and
carry to the washing place—‘*in other clothes*’—belonging to another
person; so that the clothes may not be torn by the tying, in which they
undergo a great strain.

‘*Nor shall he allow them to be worn*’;—he shall not give over, for a
consideration, to one man the clothes belonging to another, for wearing.
This is what is meant by ‘allowing to wear’; the other man does the
*wearing*, and it is the washerman that *allows* him to do it.

Since no penalty has been laid down in this connoction, we have to take
it as consisting of the ‘*māṣa* of gold’ which has been laid down
before.—(396)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 823), which adds the following
notes:—The washerman shall not carry clothes tying them in
cloth;—‘*navāsayet*,’ nor should he keep them in his house, or he should
not allow them to be used by others on receiving cash-hire from them.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.238), which adds the following
explanation:—The washerman shall wash clothes by rinsing them on a plank
of cotton-wood, and not on stone; he shall not mix them up, *i.e*.,
shall not exchange them among the diverse owners, says
*Bālambhaṭṭī*,—nor shall he keep them in his house;—if he does any of
these things, he should be punished.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 313), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Śālmale*,’ made of cotton-wood,—‘*ślakṣṇe*,’
soft,—‘*nirṇijyāt*,’ should wash,—‘*nejakaḥ*,’ washerman,—‘*nacha
vāsāṃsi vāsobhirnirharet*,’ he should not carry clothes tied up in other
clothes, to the washing-place,—‘*na ca vāsayet*,’ he should not let the
clothes of one person be worn by another. The meaning is that if he does
not act up to these rules, he becomes liable to punishment.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 311), as laying down
rules for washermen.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.238).—‘If the washerman wears the clothes belonging to
others, he should he made to pay 3 *Paṇas*; and 10 *Paṇas*, if he sells
or lets or pledges or lends them.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रतीतार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.३९४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

396	A washerman shall wash (the clothes of his employers) gently on a smooth board of Salmaliwood he shall not return the clothes (of one person) for those (of another), nor allow anybody (but the owner) to wear them.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/397_tantuvAyo_dashapalam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>397 तन्तुवायो दशपलम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

तन्तुवायो दशपलं  
दद्याद् एकपलाधिकम् ।  
अतो ऽन्यथा वर्तमानो  
दाप्यो द्वादशकं दमम्  ॥ ८.३९७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/397_tantuvAyo_dashapalam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The weaver shall repay ten ‘palas’ with one ‘pala’ added to it; if he acts otherwise than this, he should be made to pay a fine of twelve.—(397)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

ततून् वयति **तन्तुवायः** कुविन्दः । शाकटकादेः पटस्य कर्ता । स सूत्रपलानि दश गृहीत्वा शाटकं वयन् एकपलाधिकं[^३४१] वस्त्रं दद्यात् । अनया वृद्ध्या सर्वं दद्यात् । स्थूलसूक्ष्मादिवाससां रोमवतां च कल्पना कर्तव्या । **अन्यथा** द्वादशपणो दण्डः । वृद्ध्यदाने[^३४२] ऽयं दण्डः । मूलच्छेदे तु[^३४३] गणोक्तः । एवं विंशतिपलं यदि न ददाति वृद्धिं द्विगुणो दण्डः । एवं कल्पना कार्या- त्रिगुणश् चतुर्गुण इत्यादि । 


[^३४३]:
     M G DK add: sūtrāṇi


[^३४२]:
     M G: vṛddhidāne


[^३४१]:
     M G: yaṃ naikapalādhikaṃ; DK: vayannaikapalādhikaṃ

<u>अन्ये</u> तु दण्डं राजभागम् इत्य् आहुः ॥ ८.३९७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The ‘*weaver*’ is one who weaves yarns, and makes clot? (cloth?) for
garments, etc.

When he has received ‘*ten palas*’ of yarn, he should return a piece of
cloth weighing one more ‘*pala*.’ He should make his repayments at this
rate of interest. Special considerations may be made in regard to the
coarseness or fineness of the texture of the cloth, or to the fact of
its being wooly and so forth.

Otherwise there shall be a fine of twelve ‘*paṇas*.’

This punishment is to be inflicted in the case of non-payment of the
*interest*. In the case of non-payment of the *principal*, he would have
to pay according to the rule laid down by the guild.

Thus in the case of the principal consisting of ‘*twenty palas*’ of
yarn, if the man does not pay the interest, his fine shall he double;
and so on, the fine being computed triple, quadruple and so forth.

Others hold that the fine is to be paid to the king.—(397)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Dvādaśakam*’—‘*Twelve paṇas*’ (Kullūka and Medhātithi, who does not
say ‘*palas*,’ as asserted by Buhler);—‘twelve times the value of the
yarn’(Govindarāja);—‘one-twelth of the value of the yarn’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka*, (p. 785), which explains
‘*dvādaśakam*’ as ‘fine consisting of 12 *kārṣāpaṇas*’;—and in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 311), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Tantuvāya*,’ the weaver of cloth, having received 10 *palas* of
yarn, shall, after weaving it, give to the owner cloth weighing 11
*palas*; otherwise acting,—*i.e*., having received 10 *palas* of yam, if
he gives cloth weighing only 10 *palas*,—he should pay a fine. It adds
that this rule refers to coarse yams.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.179-180).—‘In the matter of woolen and cotton yarns, of
the ordinary counts, the increase is 10 *Palas* per 100 *Palas*; it is 5
*Palas* per 100, when the yarns are of the middling count; and 3 *Palas*
per cent, in the case of very fine yarns. In the case of clothes that
are embroidered, or worked with wool, the loss in weight is the
thirtieth part; in the case of garments of silk or of bark, there is
neither increase nor decrease.’

*Nārada* (Aparārka, p. 784, and Vivādaratnākara, p. 312).—‘In the case
of cotton and woolen cloth, there is an increase of 10 *Palas* per cent
.; this in the case of thick yarns; in the case of yarns of middle
counts it is 5 *Palas* per cent; and in that of fine yarns, it is only 3
*Palas* per cent. In the case of cloth that is embroidered or
wool-worked, there is a decrease by the thirtieth part. In the case of
cloth of silk or of bark, there is neither decrease nor increase.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

छिन्नं द्वादशगुणं दाप्यः । एवं सर्वद्रव्याणां लोहादीनां छेदने । साहसप्रकरणे च तत्सादृश्याद् इमौ श्लोकाव् उच्येते ॥ ८.३९५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

397	A weaver (who has received) ten palas (of thread), shall return (cloth weighing) one pala more; he who acts differently shall be compelled to pay a fine of twelve (panas).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/398_shulkasthAneShu_kushalAH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>398 शुल्कस्थानेषु कुशलाः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

शुल्कस्थानेषु कुशलाः  
सर्वपण्य-विचक्षणाः ।  
कुर्युर् अर्घं यथापण्यं  
ततो विंशं नृपो हरेत्  ॥ ८.३९८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/398_shulkasthAneShu_kushalAH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king shall take one-twentieth of the price of saleable commodities, that may be fixed by men who have experience of custom-houses and are experts in all kinds of merchandise.—(398)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

येषु प्रदेशेषु शुल्कम् आदीयते तानि **शुल्कस्थानानि**[^३४४] राजभिर् वणिग्भिः[^३४५] स्वप्रतिदेशनियतानि कल्पितानि । तेषु स्थानेषु ये **कुशलाः** शौल्किकाः,[^३४६] ये धूर्तैर् न[^३४७] शक्यन्ते वञ्चयितुम्, तथा सर्वेषां पण्यानाम् आगमक्रयविक्रयक्षयव्ययसारासारादिविधिज्ञा[^३४८] **विचक्षणाः** ते[^३४९] भाण्डस्यागतस्य देशान्तरात्[^३५०] नीयमानस्य **वार्घं कुर्युः** । **ततो** **विंश**तिभागं राजा गृह्णीयात् । 


[^३५०]:
     M G: -āgatasyānyadeśāntarā; J: deśāntare


[^३४९]:
     M G: tair


[^३४८]:
     M G omit: kṣayavyaya, and read: -sārasādividhi-; DK (1: 1708; but not 4: 2330): āgamakṣayakrayasārāsārādividhijñā


[^३४७]:
     M G DK (1: 1708) add: ca


[^३४६]:
     M G: śauktikāḥ


[^३४५]:
     DK (1: 1708; but no 4: 2330) add: ca


[^३४४]:
     M G add: ca

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;किं पुनर् अर्घकरणेन । एतावद् एव वक्तव्यं पण्यानां विंश्तिभागम् इति । 

<u>सत्यम्,</u> यदा स्वरूपेण द्रव्यं राजा[^३५१] गृह्णाति । स्वरूपकान्य् उपयुज्यन्ते[^३५२] शाटकादीनि[^३५३] । तत्र विंशतिभागः प्राग् विंशतेर्<sup> </sup>[^३५४] न पाटनम् अन्तरेणोपपद्यत इत्य् एवमर्थम् अर्घकरणम् । अविक्रेयाणाम् आत्मोपयोगिनां नास्ति शुल्क इति ज्ञापितुं यथापण्यम् । एवं कालानुरूप्येण । न सर्वपण्यं सर्वदा विक्रियत एकरूपेणार्घेण । अतो देशकालापेक्षया पण्यानाम् अर्घव्यवस्था, न नियतो ऽर्घ इति ॥ ८.३९८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Custom houses*’ are those places where duties and tolls are realised,
as fixed by the king and the merchants in accordance with the special
conditions of each country. Those who have experience of these are the
‘custom-house officials’; these men cannot be hoodwinked by clever
rogues.

Similarly there are men who are ‘*experts in all kinds of merchandise*,’
*i.e*., who know all about the demand and supply, the good and bad
qualities and such details regarding all commodities.

When things are brought by merchants in boxes from other countries, the
said experts fix their prices; and of this price the king shall take the
twentieth part.

“What is the use of the valuation? It would be enough to say that the
king shall receive the twentieth part of each commodity.”

This would be all right in cases where the king realises his dues *in
kind*. But in the case of such cloth-pieces as are used in the form in
which they are sold, the twentieth part could not be taken without
tearing each piece. Hence it is that valuation becomes necessary.

In the case of unsaleable commodities, or of articles meant for personal
use, there are no duties, hence the text adds the term ‘*yathā-paṇyam*,’
‘*saleable commodities*.’

The valuation has to be done in accordance with several considerations
of time, place and other circumstances; for instance, all commodities do
not sell at the same price at all times; so that the price of any
article cannot be regarded as fixed for all time.—(398)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Tataḥ*’—‘Of the amount thus fixed’ (Medhātithi);—‘out of the profit on
that amount’ (Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 304), which remarks that
this refers to commodity. imported from other countries;—in *Aparārka*
(p. 833);—in *Vīramitrodaya*, (Rājanīti, p. 164), which adds that,
though from the words it would seem that the twentieth part of the value
of the commodity is meant, yet, in fact, it is of the profit over and
above the value fixed; for if the king were to take the twentieth part
of the value, then the trader would have no profit at all, and his
business would be ruined;—and in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī*, (p. 954.)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñavalkya* (2.261).—‘The King shall take as duty the twentieth part
of the price fixed for each commodity.’

*Gautama* (10.26).—‘In the case of merchandise one-twentieth should be
paid as duty.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.18.14-15).—‘The duty on goods imported by sea is, after
deducting a choice article, ten *Paṇas* in the hundred. He shall also
lay just duties on other marketable goods, according to their intrinsic
value, without oppressing the traders.’

*Arthaśāstra* (I, p. 241).—‘The trade-commissioner shall keep himself
informed of the prices and the demand for commodities got out of the
earth and those got out of the water, imported by land and by
water;—also of the time for their collection and disposal. Of such
commodities as are found in large quantities, he shall fix the price
after collecting them in one place. Of commodities produced in his own
country, the commissioner shall establish an emporium with a single
outlet; of those imported from outside, there shall be an emporium with
several outlets; and the sale of those kinds of commodities shall he so
arranged as to be most helpful to the people of the country. Even large
profits he shall forego if it injures the people...... In the case of
commodities sold by measures of capacity, 16 per cent, shall be the duty
payable to the King; 20 per cent, in the case of things sold by weight;
11 per cent, in that of things sold by the number. Exports from outside
he shall encourage by favourable treatment. To sea-going and land
merchants he shall grant concessions and advances and help in other
ways.’

*Viṣṇu* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 304),—‘In the case of commodities produced
in the country itself, the King shall levy a duty in the shape of the
tenth part; and in that of those imported from outside, the twentieth
part.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

द्रव्यस्यागमनिर्गमे देशकालापेक्षया अर्घनिपातेन विंशभागः शुल्कः ॥ ८.३९६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

398	Let the king take one-twentieth of that (amount) which men, well acquainted with the settlement of tolls and duties (and) skilful in (estimating the value of) all kinds of merchandise, may fix as the value for each saleable commodity.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/399_rAjnaH_prakhyAtabhANDAni.md">
<details open><summary><h3>399 राज्ञः प्रख्यातभाण्डानि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

राज्ञः प्रख्यातभाण्डानि  
प्रतिषिद्धानि यानि च ।  
ताणि निर्हरतो लोभात्  
सर्वहारं हरेन् नृपः  ॥ ८.३९९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/399_rAjnaH_prakhyAtabhANDAni.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Those commodities that have been proclaimed as the ‘king’s monopoly,’ and those that are forbidden,—if any one, through greed, exports these, the king shall confiscate all his property.—(399)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**राज्ञः** संबन्धितया **प्रख्यातानि** **यानि** **भाण्डानि** राजोपयोगितया — यथा हस्तिनः, काश्मीरेषु कुंकुमम्, प्राच्येषु[^३५५] पट्टोर्णादीनि, प्रतीच्येष्व् अश्वाः, दाक्षिणात्येषु मणिमुक्तादीनि — यद् यस्य राज्ञो विषये सुलभम् अन्यत्र दुर्लभं तत्र तस्य प्रख्यापनं[^३५६] भवति । तेन हि राजान इतरेतरं संदधते । **प्रतिषिद्धानि यानि** राज्ञा मदीयाद् देशान् नैतद् अन्यत्र नेयम् अत्रैव वा विक्रेयं यथा दुर्भिक्षे धान्यम् इत्य् एवमादीनि । **लोभान् निर्हरतो** देशान्तरं नयतो विक्रीणानस्य वा **सर्वहारं हरेत्,** सर्वहरणं सर्वहारः । अयं धनलोभान् नयतो दण्डः । राजान्तरोपायनार्थं त्व् अधिकतरः शारीरो ऽपि दुर्गावरोधादिः ॥ ८.३९९ ॥


[^३५६]:
     M G: prakṣālanaṃ; DK 1: 1706; not 4: 2330): prakhyātaṃ


[^३५५]:
     M G: kuṃkumaprāyeṣu; DK (1: 1706; not 4: 2330) omits: prācyeṣu
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Those commodities that have been ‘*proclaimed*’ to belong to the king’s
monopoly,—*e.g*. elephants in the eastern countries, saffron, silks and
woolens in Kaśmir, horses among the western countries, precious stones,
pearls, etc., among the southern countries; in fact such articles as are
easily obtainable in the dominions of the king concerned, but rare in
other countries. Kings come to a mutual understanding among themselves
regarding all such commodities.

‘*Forbidden*’—*i.e*., those in regard to which the king has ordered that
they should not he exported outside his dominions; *e.g*. during
famines, the exporting of food-grains is prohibited.

‘*Through greed*,’—if some one exports for sale such commodities to
other countries, the king shall confiscate all his property.

This punishment is meant for one who does the exporting with a view to
profiteering, if they are carried for being presented to a foreign king,
then the punishment shall be severer in the form of imprisonment and
other forms of corporeal punishment.—(399)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 300), which adds the
following notes:—Those objects that are specially fit for a king’s
use—such as large elephants, and so forth—as also those the export of
which is prohibited, such as grains and other things difficult to obtain
in the country, and hence not to be sold to foreign countries,—if,
through greed, merchants should export such articles to foreign
countries, they should have all their property confiscated by the king,
*i.e*., he should take away all that the man may have earned over the
commodity.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 817); and again on p. 834;—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 174);—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p.
954);—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi*, (p. 119), which has the following
explanation—‘Such elephants, horses and other things as are fit for the
king only,—and things of which all buying and selling have been
prohibited by the king,—if any one sells these in open defiance of the
royal command, all that he obtains by this selling should be confiscated
by the king.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇu* (5.130).—‘He who sells a commodity on which the King has laid an
embargo, shall have it confiscated.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.261).—‘If anything is sold of which the sale has been
prohibited or which is fit for the King’s own use, shall go to the
King.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 301).—‘On selling a forbidden
commodity, one shall have his limbs cut off.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यद् यत्र प्रचुरं यत्र च दुर्लभं तत् तस्य राज्ञः **प्रख्यातं** भवति । तथोदीच्येष्व् आजानेया अश्वाः, कुंकुमं काश्मीरेषु, प्राच्येष्व् अगरुकर्पूरादि तदन्यत्र न निर्हार्यम् । अनिर्हृतं हि दुर्लभत्वात् । इतरेतरं राज्ञां कार्यप्रतिबन्धाद् उपायनं भवति । यस्य च धर्मार्थोपायनस्य धर्मजनकस्यार्थजनकस्य च क्रयविक्रयप्रतिषेधो राज्ञा कृतो भवति । यथा माक्षिकस्य मधुनः । तच् च न निर्हर्यम् । वणिग्भिर् निर्हरतो नृपः सर्वभागं हरेत् ॥ ८.३९७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

399	Let the king confiscate the whole property of (a trader) who out of greed exports goods of which the king has a monopoly or (the export of which is) forbidden.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/400_shulkasthAnam_pariharann.md">
<details open><summary><h3>400 शुल्कस्थानम् परिहरन्न् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

शुल्कस्थानं परिहरन्न्  
अकाले क्रय-विक्रयी ।  
मिथ्यावादी च संख्याने  
दाप्यो ऽष्टगुणम् अत्ययम्  ॥ ८.४०० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/400_shulkasthAnam_pariharann.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If one who buts and sells avoids a custom-house, and at the improper time, or makes a wrong statement in counting,—he shall be made to pay a fine eight times the amount evaded.—(400)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**क्रयविक्रयी** वाणिजक[^३५७] उच्यते । **शुल्कस्थानं परिहरन्** उत्पथेन गच्छन्, **अकाले** वा रात्रौ शुल्काध्यक्षेषु गतेषु । **संख्याने** **मिथावादी** न्यूनं कथयति गणनायाम् । उपलक्षणं चैतत् संख्यानम् । तेन प्रच्छादने ऽप्य् एष एव विधिः । **दाप्यो ऽष्टगुणम् अत्ययं** दन्डः[^३५८] । यावद् अपह्नुते तावदष्टगुणम्, यावान् वा तस्यापह्नुतस्योचितः शुल्कस् तदष्टगुणं[^३५९] दाप्यः । आद्यम् एव युक्तम् । **अत्यय**शब्दो हि तत्र समञ्जसः, तद्धेतुत्वाद् द्रव्ये ।


[^३५९]:
     M G J: tam aṣṭaguṇaṃ (I follow DK 4: 2331)


[^३५८]:
     DK (1: 1706; 4: 2331): daṇḍaṃ


[^३५७]:
     M G: vāṇijya

<u>अन्ये</u> त्व् **अकाले क्रयविक्रयी**[^३६०] इति संबन्धं कुर्वन्ति । अकालश् चागृहीते शुल्के रहसि वा प्रतिषेधो ऽयम् ॥ ८.४०० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Who buys and sells*’—*i.e*., the trader.

‘*Who avoids the custom-house*’—by taking to unfrequented roads.

‘*At the improper time*’—at night, when the custom-officers have gone
away.

‘*Who makes a wrong statement in counting*,’—when counting the articles,
if he mentions a figure larger than the actual one. ‘Counting’ is
mentioned only by way of illustration; hence the same rule applies to
case of *concealment* also.

Such a man should be made to pay a fine ‘*eight times the amount
evaded*’;—*i.e*., eight times the value of the articles that he
conceals; or eight times the duty that he tries to evade. The former is
more reasonable; as ‘evading’ would be more applicable to the
*articles*.

Others have offered the construction—‘*who buys and sells at the
improper time*’;—this would he a prohibition of carrying on transactions
before the duty has been paid, or in secret.—(400)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 297), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Śulka*’ is the duty realised by the king on all sales
and purchases,—the ‘*sthānas*’ of this are the customs-outposts
established by the king on rivers, in cities, on mountains, and so
forth;—when themerchant reaches these out-posts, he should pay the
custom; he should never seek to avoid their payment by going by
untrodden tracks;—if with a view to avoiding customs-outposts, the
merchant should seek to carry on his sale and purchases at the improper
time—*e.g*., at night,—or if he declares his goods falsely,—then he
should be made to pay a fine which is eight times the value of the
commodity in question.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī*, (p. 955).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Yājñvalkya* (2.262).—‘A. traitor who makes a false declaration of the
measure of his commodity, or who evades the customs outpost, or who buys
and sells fraudulently, should be made to pay eight times the value of
the merchandise.’

*Nārada* (Aparārka, p. 834).—(Same as Manu.)

*Viṣṇu* (Do.).—‘If a trader tries to evade the payment of duty he shall
have his entire goods confiscated.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘On arriving at the customs-office the trader shall
pay the proper duty, and shall never evade it, as this is meant to be an
offering to the King.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 298).—‘The trader who uses false
weights and measures incurs the penalty of having his limbs cut off, or
some corporal punishment.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

कः शक्ष्यति काले दिवा शुल्कस्थानं परिहर्तुम् इति स्वभावसिद्धं कालम् अनुवदति । न त्व् एतेन ततो ऽन्यकालो ऽभ्यनुज्ञायते, दिवाकाले परिहरतो न दोष इति । शुल्कम् अष्टगुणं दाप्यम् । तथा यावती संख्या तावतीम् अप्य् अष्टगुणां दापयेत् मिथावचनेन । आगमोपयोगौ द्रव्यस्यानियताव् इतीदम् उच्यते ॥ ८.३९८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

400	He who avoids a custom-house (or a toll), he who buys or sells at an improper time, or he who makes a false statement in enumerating (his goods), shall be fined eight times (the amount of duty) which he tried to evade.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/401_Agaman_nirgamam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>401 आगमन् निर्गमम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

आगमं निर्गमं स्थानं  
तथा वृद्धि-क्षयाव् उभौ ।  
विचार्य सर्वपण्यानां  
कारयेत् क्रय-विक्रयौ  ॥ ८.४०१ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/401_Agaman_nirgamam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king shall regulate the purchase and sale of all marketable commodities after having taken into consideration their source, destination and detention, as also profit and loss.—(401)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

आपणभूमौ ये विक्रेतारस् ते न स्वेच्छया मूल्यं कर्तुं लभेरन्, नापि राजा क्रीणीयात् स्वरुचिकृतेन मूल्येन । कथं तर्हि । इदम् इदं निरूप्यम्[^३६१] । **आगमम्** — किं प्रत्यागच्छति देशान्तराद् उत न, तथेयतो[^३६२] दूराद् आगच्छति । एवं **निर्गमस्थाने** — किं संप्रत्य् एव विक्रियते, उत तिष्ठति । संप्रति निष्क्रामतो द्रव्यस्य स्वल्पो ऽपि लाभो महाफलः, तदुत्थितेन मूल्येन द्रव्यान्तराविषयेण[^३६३] क्रयविक्रयेण[^३६४] पुनर् लाभः । **स्थानात्** **वृद्धिक्षयौ-** कियत्य् अस्य वृद्धिस् तिष्ठति, कीदृशो वा क्षयः । इत्य् एतत् सर्वं परीक्ष्य, स्वदेशे **क्रयविक्रयौ** **कारयेत्** । यथा न वणिजां पीडा भवति, नापि क्रेतॄणाम्, तथार्घं व्यवस्थापयेत् ॥ ८.४०१ ॥


[^३६४]:
     M G omit: krayavikrayeṇa


[^३६३]:
     DK (4: 2331): dravyāntaraviṣayeṇa


[^३६२]:
     DK (4: 2331) suggests: tathā kiyato


[^३६१]:
     M G DK: nirūpya
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The vendors in the market should not he allowed to fix their prices at
their own will; nor should the king buy things at his own arbitrary
price. What should be done then? This is what should he done:—‘*Source*’
from where a certain commodity comes, from a near or a remote
country;—so also ‘*destination and detention*’—whether it is going to be
sold immediately, or will have to be kept? When a commodity is sold
immediately, even a small profit comes very useful, as the profit can he
invested in some other commodity and thus bring in another profit;—while
from ‘detention,’ both ‘profit and loss’ are possible—and how much more
profit will the detention bring in, and what amount of loss it would
involve,—all this should be taken into consideration by the king, who
should then regulate the sales and purchases in his realm; and the
prices should be fixed in such a manner that there may be no oppression
caused to the traders, or to the buyers.—(401)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara*, (p. 301), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Āgamam*,’ the import of foreign commodities from
countries either remote and inaccessible, or proximate and easily
accessible—‘*nirgamam*,’ export of commodities of the country to the
said foreign countries;—‘*sthānam*,’ the determining of the expenses
incurred in the storing of the commodity during the larger or shorter
interval between its purchase and sale;—similarily ‘*vṛddhikṣayam*,’ the
profit or loss actually accrued;—‘*vicārya*,’ having fully considered
all this,—the king shall so regulate buying and selling that there may
be no undue profit or loss to the traders.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 827);—and in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p.
942).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.401-402)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.251-253).—‘Sales should be carried on according to the
prices fixed by the King day by day; whatever profit accrues from such
sale is lawful for the trader. In the case of commodities purchased in
the country itself, the merchant shall take a profit of 5 per cent.; and
in that of those imported from outside, 10 per cent.; this rule applies
to commodities bought and sold quickly. The King shall consider the
intrinsic value of the merchandise and the cost incurred in its
marketing and then fix a price which shall be favourable alike to the
vendor and the vendee.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 302).—‘Fixing of weights and
measures, and the fixing of the price of commodities shall be placed in
charge of a trustworthy official.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

आगमादि द्रव्यस्यापेक्ष्य क्रयिविक्रयिणोश् च वृद्धिक्षयौ तयोर् अर्घनिपातेन क्रयविक्रयौ कारयेत् ॥ ८.३९९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

401	Let (the king) fix (the rates for) the purchase and sale of all marketable goods, having (duly) considered whence they come, whither they go, how long they have been kept, the (probable) profit and the (probable) outlay.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/402_pancharAtre_pancharAtre.md">
<details open><summary><h3>402 पञ्चरात्रे पञ्चरात्रे ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पञ्चरात्रे पञ्चरात्रे  
पक्षे पक्षे ऽथ वा गते ।  
कुर्वीत चैषां प्रत्यक्षम्  
अर्घसंस्थापनं नृपः  ॥ ८.४०२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/402_pancharAtre_pancharAtre.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

After the lapse of every five days, or after that of every fortnight, the king shall publicly fix the prices of things.—(402)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

आगमनिर्गमनादेर् द्रव्यस्यानित्यत्वाद् उपचयापचयाव् अर्घस्यानेकरूपौ । ततो ऽर्घसंस्थापनं **पञ्चरात्रे पञ्चरात्रे** प्रत्यक्षीकार्यम्, न सकृत् कृतं मन्तव्यम्, नापि वणिजो विश्वसितव्याः । किं तर्हि, स्वयं प्रतिजागरणीयम् । यद् द्रव्यं चिरेण निष्क्रामति तत्र **पक्षे** ऽर्घगवेषणम् अन्यत्र पाञ्चरात्रिकम् ॥ ८.४०२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In as much as the source and destination and other circumstances
concerning commodities are variable, there are several rises and falls
in their prices. Hence the fixing of the price should be done publicly
after every five days; and it should not be regarded as done once for
all; nor should entire reliance be placed upon the traders alone; the
king himself should be always wide awake.

In connection with articles that take a long time to be disposed of, the
prices should be fixed every fortnight, while in other things it should
be done after every five Says.—(402)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

Buhler is not right in saying that ‘Medhātithi omits this and the next
four verses’—(See *Translation*).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 301), where it is remarked
that the prices should be settled every fortnight for such commodities
as take a long time to dispose of, and every five days for those that
are disposed of quickly.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 315), which adds the
following notes:—In the case of country-produces which are disposed of
the same day, he should fix the profit at 5 per cent; and in that of
foreign products disposed of the same day, 10 per cent; in the case of
commodities which take sometime in being disposed of, the amount of
profit is to be fixed in accordance with the time likely to be taken in
their disposal; and in the case of commodities imported from foreign
countries, the cost of the journey both ways, of the customs and other
duties paid, should be totalled up and added to the price paid, and upon
this the prices should be so fixed that the trader makes a profit of 10
per cent on the total outlay. In short the king shall so fix the prices
that the interests of neither the consumer nor the supplier may suffer.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 827);—and in *Mitākṣarā* (2.251), where
*Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the following notes:—For commodities that cannot keep
long, every five days, for those that can keep a little longer, every
fortnight, and for those that can keep much longer, every month,—the
king should have the prices fixed by trustworthy officers in the
presence of himself as also of the expert merchants;—what the repetition
(‘*pañcarātre pañcarātre*’) means is that the prices are to be fixed
after five days or ‘after a fortnight’, &c., always throughout the
king’s life.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.401-402)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.401].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

_आगमोपयोगौ द्रव्यस्यानियताव् इत्य् अत इदम् उच्यते ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

402	Once in five nights, or at the close of each fortnight, let the king publicly settle the prices for the (merchants).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/403_tulAmAnam_pratImAnam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>403 तुलामानम् प्रतीमानम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

तुलामानं प्रतीमानं  
सर्वं च स्यात् सुलक्षितम् ।  
षट्सु षट्सु च मासेषु  
पुनर् एव परीक्षयेत्  ॥ ८.४०३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/403_tulAmAnam_pratImAnam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Scales, weights and measures should be duly marked; and they should be re-examined after every six months.—(403)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**तुला** प्रसिद्धा । **मानं** प्रस्थो द्रोण इत्यादि । **प्रतीमानं** सुवर्णादीनां परिच्छेदार्थं यत् क्रियते । सर्वतोभागे तत् **सुलक्षितं** राजचिह्नैर् अङ्कितं कार्यम् । स्वयं प्रत्यक्षेण परिच्छिद्य स्वमुद्रया । **परीक्षयेत् षट्सु षट्सु मासेषु पुनः** परीक्षां कारयेद् आप्तैर् अधिकारिभिर् यथा न विचालयन्ति केचित् ॥ ८.४०३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Scales*’—well known.

‘*Weights*’—Seer, 2½ seers and so forth.

‘*Measures*’—whereby gold and other similar things are weighed.

All this should be duly marked—with the royal sign—on all sides; the
king should himself examine them and mark them with his own seal.

After every six months he should have them re-examined by his officers,
so that no one might tamper with them.—(403)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 301), which explains
‘*pratimānam*’ as prices of stone and other materials stamped with a
royal mark, which are used for determining the exact weight of gold;—and
in *Vyavaharā-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 940).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Śaṅkha-Likhita*.—(See above, under 402.)

*Vaśiṣṭha* (19.13).—‘The measures and weights of objects necessary for
the household must be guarded against falsification.’

*Śukranīti* (1.619).—‘All measures should be definitely fixed and
examined by the King.’

*Arthaśāstra* (I, p. 256).—‘The officer in charge of weights and
measures shall see to the setting up of instruments for measurement.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

त्रयम् अप्य् एतद् राजमुद्राङ्कितम् अनाधृष्यं भवति । ऋज्व् अन्यत् ॥ ८.४०१ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

403	All weights and measures must be duly marked, and once in six months let him re-examine them.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/404_paNaM_yAnam.md">
<details open><summary><h3>404 पणं यानम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

पणं यानं तरे दाप्यं  
पौरुषो ऽर्धपणं तरे ।  
पादं पशुश् च योषिच् च  
पादार्धं रिक्तकः पुमान् [मेधातिथिपाठः - पादे]  ॥ ८.४०४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/404_paNaM_yAnam.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

At a ferry-crossing, a cart shall be made to pay one ‘paṇa’; one man’s burden half a ‘paṇa,’ an animal and a woman a quarter ‘paṇa,’ and an unloaded man one half of a quarter.—(404)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^३६५]:
     J: pāde

नदीतीरे **यानं** गन्त्रीशकटादि **तरे**[^३६६] **पणं दाप्यम्** । भाण्डपूर्णानाम् उत्तरत्रोपदेशाद् रिक्थभाण्डानां यानानां यानद्रव्यानयनार्थम् उत्तरार्यमाणानाम् अयं राजभागः । **पौरुष**वाह्यो[^३६७] भारो द्रव्यानयनार्थम् आनीयमानो **ऽर्धपणं** दाप्यः । **पशुर्** गोमहिष्यादिः पादम्, स्त्री च । **रिक्तको** न किंचित् । यो गृहीतवान् बारं स **पुमान्** **पादार्धं** दाप्यः । रिक्तस्य पुंसो नदीलङ्घनसामर्थ्यसंभावनया[^३६८] लाघवाद् अल्पम् आदानम् । स्त्री अशक्तत्वात् स्वयं तरणे[^३६९] बहु दाप्यते । **तरे** तरनिमित्तम् ॥ ८.४०४ ॥


[^३६९]:
     M G: tareṇa


[^३६८]:
     M G: - sāmarthyāsaṃbhāvanayā


[^३६७]:
     M G: -vāhye


[^३६६]:
     M G J: tareṇa; I follow DK 1: 1945; 4: 1347 (see similar error later in the com. on this verse)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

At a river-crossing, a ‘*cart*’—a conveyance, in the form of a chariot
and other things,—should pay one ‘*paṇa*.’ This is the king’s tax to be
paid by all carts that come in loaded with commodities and go out again
after having delivered these commodities, for bringing in another
supply.

‘*One man’s burden*’—when one man’s load of commodities is brought in,
the duty payable is *half-paṇa*.

‘*Animal*’— bullock, buffalo and the like;—as also a ‘*woman*’—should
pay a *quarter-paṇa*.

‘*The unloaded man*,’— who is carrying no load, should be made to pay
half of the *quarter-paṇa*. A small toll is levied from the unburdened
man, since he can cross the river by himself, and hence the help
accorded to him is comparatively small. While a woman, who is unable to
cross by herself, is made to pay more.

‘*On a ferry-crossing*’— for the purposes of crossing.—(404)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p, 270), which adds
the following notes:—This rule applies to the case of *unladen*
carts;—an empty cart, for crossing a ferry, should be made to pay one
*paṇa*;—a man with load, one-half of a *paṇa*, cattle and women, a
quarter *paṇa* and a man without load the eighth part of a *paṇa*.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 834), which adds the following
explanatory notes:—The *Pālki* and such conveyances, for crossing a
ferry, should be made to pay one *paṇa*,—a man should pay one-half of a
*paṇa*,—cattle and woman should pay a quarter *paṇa*,—as also a man,
with only his two hands, *i.e*., without any load.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 640), which adds that ‘*yānam*’
here stands for the *empty chariot*, and so forth;—‘*pauruṣaḥ*’, load
carried by one man,—‘*pādārdham*’, the eighth part of a *paṇa*.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.263), where *Bālambhaṭṭī* has the
following notes:—An empty cart should pay a *paṇa*,—a man with a load,
one-half of a *paṇa*,—cattle and woman (with the exception of those
specified below in 407) a quarter *paṇa*; and a man without load, the
eighth part of a *paṇa*. It adds that this refers to river-crossings;
the rates for sea-voyages are different.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.404-406)**

*Vaśiṣṭha* (19.21, Vivādaratnākara, p. 639).—‘The toll for crossing a
river whose width is within an arrow-reach is 8 *māṣas*; for crossing a
river whose width is more than an arrow-reach is a quarter of a
*Kārṣāpaṇa*; and that for crossing a river in which there is scanty
water, it is one *māṣa*; it is to be one and a half times these in the
case of women...... If a man swims a river-crossing, he should he made
to pay a sum hundred times of the toll.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

रिक्तं **यानं** रथादि पणं दद्यात् । पुरुषवाह्यो भारो ऽर्धपणम् । प्रकृतस्य पणस्य **पादं पशुश् च** रिक्तका **योषिच् च** । **पादार्धं रिक्तकः पुमान्** ॥ ८.४०२ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

404	At a ferry an (empty) cart shall be made to pay one pana, a man's (load) half a pana, an animal and a woman one quarter of a (pana), an unloaded man one-half of a quarter.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/405_bhANDapUrNAni_yAnAni.md">
<details open><summary><h3>405 भाण्डपूर्णानि यानानि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

भाण्डपूर्णानि यानानि  
तार्यं दाप्यानि सारतः ।  
रिक्तभाण्डानि यत् किं चित्  
पुमांसश् चाऽपरिच्छदाः  ॥ ८.४०५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/405_bhANDapUrNAni_yAnAni.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Carts laden with commodities should be made to pay the ferry-toll according to their value; those not laden with commodities may pay a triple, as also men without luggage.—(405)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**भाण्डं** द्रव्यं वस्त्रव्रीह्यादि । तेन **पूर्णानि यानानि** **सारतस् तार्यं** तारार्थं **दाप्यानि** । यदि महार्घं वस्त्रादि तत्र बह्वारोपितं तदा बहु दाप्यानि, अथ व्रीह्यादिना नातिभारेण[^३७०] तदाल्पम्[^३७१] । एवं नद्याः सुतरदुस्तरत्वेन कल्पना कर्तव्या । **रिक्तभाण्डानि** यानानि **यत् किंचित्** पणपादानि[^३७२] । **भाण्ड**शब्दो ऽत्र धनवचनः । ये चापरिच्छदास्[^३७३] ते न पादार्धम्, अपि तु यत् किंचित् ततो ऽधिकं न्यूनं वा । अत्र न शक्यो नियमः, अतः कल्पनैव शास्त्रार्थः ॥ ८.४०५ ॥


[^३७३]:
     M G DK (1: 1945): ca paricchadākośato 'paricchedās


[^३७२]:
     DK (4: 1347) suggests: paṇapādādi


[^३७१]:
     M G DK (1: 1945): tadālam


[^३७०]:
     M G: nāticāreṇa; DK (1: 1945; but not 4: 1347): nātisāreṇa
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Commodities*’— goods, such as clothes, grains and so forth; when carts
are laden with these, they should be made to pay the ferry-toll, in
accordance with their ‘value.’ If they are laden with doth and other
things of great value, they should pay heavily; while if they are
carrying only grains and other cheap things, they should pay less.

Similarly the toll to be paid may be regulated in accordance with the
lesser or greater difficulty involved in crossing a particular river.

Carts not laden with commodities may pay ‘some *little trifle*’—*i.e*.,
a *paṇa*.

The term ‘*commodity*,’ ‘*bhāṇḍa*,’ here stands for *riches*.

Those men who are without any luggage shall pay, not half of the
*quarter-paṇa* (as laid in 404), but any little trifle, more or less;
and no bard and fast rule can be laid down on this point. Such is the
sense of the scriptures.—(405)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.263), where *Bālambhaṭṭī* has the
following notes:—Carts laden with merchandise should be made to pay
according to the value of the merchandise they carry; those that are
empty as also ‘*aparicchadāḥ*,’ poor persons, may be made to pay some
little amount.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 834), which has the following
notes:—Carts laden with merchandise should each pay according to the
value of the merchandise carried; when they are empty, they may pay a
small amount; so also persons without accoutrements.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 270), which adds the
following explanations:—Carts laden with merchandise should be made to
pay in accordance with the large or small value of the merchandise
carried; empty carts and poor persons may pay some amount smaller than
the eighth part of a *paṇa*. It adds that the rule applies to river-
*crossings*. For voyages by river the rates are different (see next
verse).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.404-406)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.404].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

कर्मद्रव्यानुरूप्येण पूर्णानि यानानि दद्युः । अपरिच्छदा अपि यत् किंचिद् दद्युः । रिक्तकस्यैको ऽर्धपादः ॥ ८.४०३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

405	Carts (laden) with vessels full (of merchandise) shall be made to pay toll at a ferry according to the value (of the goods), empty vessels and men without luggage some trifle.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/406_dIrghAdhvani_yathAdesham.md">
<details open><summary><h3>406 दीर्घाध्वनि यथादेशम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

दीर्घाध्वनि यथादेशं  
यथाकालं तरो भवेत् ।  
नदीतीरेषु तद् विद्यात्  
समुद्रे नाऽस्ति लक्षणम्  ॥ ८.४०६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/406_dIrghAdhvani_yathAdesham.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

For a long passage, the boat-fare should be in propor tion to the time and place; this should be understood to be the rule regarding the banks of rivers; in connection with the sea, there is no fixed rule.—(406)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

पारावारोत्तारणे पूर्वं दानम् । अयं नावा ग्रामान्तरगमने । **दीर्घाध्वनि** योजनादिपरिमाणेन गन्तव्ये[^३७४] । **यथादेशम्** । यस्मिन् देशे यत् तरिदानं नाविकैः स्थापितं तद् एव । **यथाकालम्** । कालो वर्षादिः बहूदकः,[^३७५] तत्रान्यन् मूल्यम् । स्वल्पोदकायां सरिति चिरेण ग्रामप्राप्तौ नाविकानाम् अधिकतरायासवताम् अधिकमूल्यम् । तरमूल्ये कारणे कार्यशब्दस् **तरो**[^३७६] **भवेद्** इति । यावद् यावद् दीर्घो देशस् तावत् तावत् तरपणो वर्धते । एतच् च **नदीतीरेषु विद्यात्** । **समुद्रे** सागरे **नास्ति** तर**लक्षणम्** । न शक्यते लक्षयितुं कति योजनानि नौर् व्यूढा येन तदनुसारेण मूल्यं कल्प्यते[^३७७] । नदनदीषु शक्यते ज्ञातुम् अयं पन्था योजनमात्रो द्वियोजन इति । तत्र हि तत्र ग्रामाः परिमाणचिह्नम् । तत्रैकयोजने ऽध्वनि यन् मूल्यं द्विगुणं तद् द्वियोजने । समुद्रे तु बहुवाह्या नौः, न च सुष्टु शक्यते योजनादिपरिच्छेदः कर्तुम् । अत एवोक्तं **समुद्रे नास्ति लक्षणम्** इति ॥ ८.४०६ ॥


[^३७७]:
     M G: kalpante; DK (4: 1348; not 1: 1945) kalpyeta


[^३७६]:
     M G: tare


[^३७५]:
     M G J: varṣādibahūdakas


[^३७४]:
     M G: -parimāṇenāgantavye
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The toll mentioned in the foregoing verses is to be paid for the
crossing of rivers; what is now declared relates to the passage by boat
from one village to another.

‘*For a long passage*’—*i.e*., in a journey that is measured by miles.

‘*In proportion to the place*’—*i.e*., according to the freight-rates
that may have been fixed by the boatmen of the place concerned.

‘*In proportion to the time*,’—the fare payable during the rains, or
where there is plenty of water, shall he different from that payable in
a river where there is very little water; in the latter case there is
much time taken in going from one village to another, and it involves
more labour on the part of the boatmen,—hence the fare in this case
would he heavier.

The term ‘*tara*,’ which literally means *crossing*, which is the effect
of the *fare* that is paid, has been used here for this latter. The
sense is that the amount of fare payable goes on increasing in
proportion to the distance traversed.

‘*This should be understood to be the rule regarding the banks of
rivers*.’

‘*In regard to the sea, there is no settled rule*’—regarding fares.
Since it cannot be ascertained how many miles the boat has been carried,
according to which the distance and the fare could be computed. In the
case of rivers and lakes, it can be ascertained whether the distance
traversed is one *Yojana* (8 miles) or two; because the villages serve
as the measuring points; so that the fare paid for a journey of two
would ho double of that paid for that of one *Yojana*. In the sea, on
the other hand, the boat can be taken with great difficulty, and
distances also cannot he measured; it is for this reason that it has
been declared that ‘*as regards the sea there is no settled
rule*.’—(406)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 270), which
explains the meaning to be that for voyages by river, the freight, etc.
payable is to be determined by considerations of place and time; and in
the case of voyages *by sea*, there is no such hard and fast rule, the
freight payable being what is agreed upon in each case.

It is quoted in *V* *yavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 263), which has the
following notes:—What has been said in the preceding verse applies to
river-crossings; in the case of long voyages by river the fares are to
be determined by such considerations as whether the river is sluggish or
swift, whether the season is summer or the rains; for voyages by sea, no
rates can be fixed.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.404-406)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.404].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

दीर्घे यातव्ये ऽध्वनि कल्प्यस् तरः क्षयलाभान् अवेक्ष्य । तथा नदीवैपुल्यम् अपेक्ष्य पारगमने । ऋज्व् अन्यत् ॥ ८.४०४ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

406	For a long passage the boat-hire must be proportioned to the places and times; know that this (rule refers) to (passages along) the banks of rivers; at sea there is no settled (freight).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/407_garbhiNI_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>407 गर्भिणी तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

गर्भिणी तु द्विमासादिस्  
तथा प्रव्रजितो मुनिः ।  
ब्राह्मणा लिङ्गिनश् चैव  
न दाप्यास् तारिकं तरे  ॥ ८.४०७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/407_garbhiNI_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But a woman who is pregnant two months or more, an ascetic, a hermit, and brāhmaṇas in holy orders shall not be made to pay the toll at a ferry-crossing.—(407)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

द्वाभ्यां मासाभ्याम् ऋतुदर्शनस्य व्यक्तगर्भा स्त्री भवति । तस्या अनुग्राह्यत्वात् तरपणो न ग्राह्यः । **प्रव्रजितश्** चतुर्थाश्रमी । **मुनिस्** तापसः । **ब्राह्मणा लिङ्गिनो** ब्रह्मचारिणः । ब्राह्मणग्रहणं विशेषणम् । तेन बाह्यप्रव्रज्यालिङ्गधरिणां नैष विधिः । तरप्रयोजनं **तारिकं** पणादि तरनिमित्तं न दाप्याः । वृत्तानुरोधात् **तारिकम्** इति सिद्धे **तर**ग्रहणम् ॥ ८.४०७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

If two months have elapsed since the last monthly course, it is a sign
that the woman is pregnant, such a woman deserves kindly treatment;
hence no ferry-toll is to be realised from her.

‘*Ascetic*’—belonging to the fourth order.

‘*Hermit*’—living in the forest and performing austerities.

*Brāhmaṇas in holy orders*’— the term ‘*brāhmaṇa*’ has been added as a
qualification; hence the rule does not apply to those who only bear the
garb of asceticism.

‘*Toll*’—fare for crossing, in the form of a ‘*paṇa*’ and so forth.

This they shall not be made to pay.

Having mentioned ‘toll’ already, the author has added the term ‘*at a
ferry-crossing*’ only in consideration of metrical exigencies.—(407)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 835), which adds that this is an
exception to the preceding rules;—aṇd in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p.
957).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Nārada* (18.38).—‘The Brāhmaṇa has the right to cross rivers without
paying toll, and to be conveyed to the other side before others. When
engaged in trading, if he uses a ferry boat, he shall have to pay no
toll.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.132-133).—‘A ferry-man, or a toll-official, who takes a fare
or toll from a student or an ascetic or a renunciate, or a pregnant
woman, or one going on pilgrimage,—shall he fined 10 Paṇas,—and he shall
restore the toll to them.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

प्रतीतार्थः श्लोकः ॥ ८.४०५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

407	But a woman who has been pregnant two months or more, an ascetic, a hermit in the forest, and Brahmanas who are students of the Veda, shall not be made to pay toll at a ferry.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/408_yan_nAvi.md">
<details open><summary><h3>408 यन् नावि ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

यन् नावि किं चिद् दाशानां  
विशीर्येताऽपराधतः ।  
तद् दाशैर् एव दातव्यं  
समागम्य स्वतो ऽंशतः  ॥ ८.४०८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/408_yan_nAvi.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If anything on the boat happen to be damaged by the fault of the boatmen,—it shall be made good by the boatmen collectively, each according to his share.—(408)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

नाव्यारोपितभाण्डं तरणिकायां यद् **दाशानां** नाविकानाम् अपराधाद् आवर्तमानजलेन प्रदेशेन नयतां वा तत्स्थानं ज्ञात्वा दृढबन्धनेन जलप्रवेशम्[^३७८] अकुर्वतां वध्र्यादिनहनीभिर् अयोमयीभिश् चर्मबन्धैः सूत्रबन्धैर् वा शिथिलीकृतवातां यदि भाण्डं **विशीर्येत** विनाश्येत तदा तैर् एव **दात्व्यं स्वतो ऽंशतः** स्वभागाद्[^३७९] भाण्डस्वामिने, **समागम्य** यावन्तो नाव्यारूढा दाशाः ॥ ८.४०८ ॥


[^३७९]:
     M G: svarājānnabhāgād


[^३७८]:
     M G: dṛḍhabandhanajalapraveśam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

When a commodity placed on the boat happen, in course of the crossing,
to be damaged ‘*by the fault of the boatmen*,’—*i.e*., by steering the
vessel through pools and eddies, or not anchoring when facing a storm,
or by not securely tightening up the boat with chains of iron or
leathern thongs,—then they should make it good,—‘*each according to his
share*,’—to the owner of the commodity.

‘*Collectively*’—*i.e*., all the boatmen that may be on the boat—(408)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 642), which explains
‘*dāśa*’ (or as it reads ‘*dāsa*’) as ‘the fisherman and others engaged
for rowing the ferry.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

निगदव्याख्यातः श्लोकः ॥ ८.४०७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

408	Whatever may be damaged in a boat by the fault of the boatmen, that shall be made good by the boatmen collectively, (each paying) his share.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/409_eSha_nauyAyinAm.md">
<details open><summary><h3>409 एष नौयायिनाम् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एष नौयायिनाम् उक्तो  
व्यवहारस्य निर्णयः ।  
दाशापराधतस् तोये  
दैविके नाऽस्ति निग्रहः  ॥ ८.४०९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/409_eSha_nauyAyinAm.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

This law has been laid down in connection with suits by boat-passengers relating to the negligence of boatmen in water; there is no punishment in the case of accidents due to heaven.—(409)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

नौभिर् यान्ति तच्छीला **नौयानिनः**, तेषाम् **एष** विधिर् **उक्तो** यथा **दाशापराधाद्** यद् भ्रष्टम्[^३८०] उदके तद् दद्युः । **दैविके** दोष उत्पाते वातादिना नौभङ्गे **नास्ति** नाविकानां द्रव्यनाशे **निग्रहः** । 


[^३८०]:
     M G: dattabhraṣṭam

एष स्थले भाण्डवाहकानां भारिकाणां वा न्यायः । यद्य् अप्रमादेन प्रक्रामति भारिको गृहीतदण्डावलंबनो दृढबन्धोपरिभागो ऽकस्माद् दृष्ट्या[^३८१] पथि कर्दमीकृते पतितस्य भाण्डं नश्येन् न भारिकस्य दोषः स्यात् ॥ ८.४०९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Boat-passengers*’—persons habituated to going about a boats.

It is with regard to these that this law has been laid down, that ‘if
anything should be damaged by the fault of the boatmen, it shall be made
good by them.’

‘*In the case of accidents due to heaven*’—*i.e*., when the boat breaks
as the result of an accident due to storm or such causes, and
commodities happen to be damaged,—no punishment is to be inflicted upon
the boatmen.

This same law applies to the carriers of goods on land also. If the
carrier walks along with due care, supporting himself by a staff, and
has duly tied up the bundles, if he happens to tumble down on the road
which has suddenly been rendered slippery by rain, and the goods he is
carrying become damaged in consequence,—whose fault could it be held to
be?—(409)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 641).
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

न किंचिद् वक्तव्यं स्फुटत्वाच् छ्लोकस्य ॥ ८.४०७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

409	This decision in suits (brought) by passengers (holds good only) in case the boatmen are culpably negligent on the water; in the case of (an accident) caused by (the will of) the gods, no fine can be (inflicted on them).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/410_vANijya~N_kArayed.md">
<details open><summary><h3>410 वाणिज्यङ् कारयेद् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वाणिज्यं कारयेद् वैश्यं  
कुसीदं कृषिम् एव च ।  
पशूनां रक्षणं चैव  
दास्यं शूद्रं द्विजन्मनाम्  ॥ ८.४१० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/410_vANijya~N_kArayed.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

He shall make the Vaiśya to carry on trade, money-lending, agriculture,—and cattle-trading; and the Śūdra to perform service for the twice-born castes.—(410)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>
<u>इह केचिद्</u> व्याचक्षते । अनिच्छन्ताव् अपि वैश्यशूद्रौ बलाद् एव तानि कर्माणि कारयितव्यौ यत एतयोः स्वधर्मो ऽयम् । सत्य् अपि दृष्टार्थत्वे ऽदृष्टार्थता विद्यते नियमविधित्वात् । एवं च सति ब्राह्मणो ऽपि हठात् प्रतिग्राहयितव्य इत्य् आपतति । पक्ष एव दोषत्वेनायम् उक्त इति चेद्, अत्राप्य् एष एव पक्षः ।

<u>तद् अयुक्तम्</u> । सत्यां धनार्थितायां[^३८२] शास्त्रतो नियमः । न तु विधिनिबन्धनैव[^३८३] प्रवृत्तिः । यत्र स्वयं प्रयोजकम् अस्ति तत्र न[^३८४] विधिः प्रयोक्तृत्वम् । नियमांशे तु विधेर् व्यापारः । स चेदृशो[^३८५] नियमः । **वैश्यम्** एव **कारयेद् वाणिज्यम्,** अन्यं कुर्वाणम् असत्याम् आपदि दण्डयेत् । एवं ब्राह्मणम् एव प्रतिग्रहम् । तथा च प्रतिग्रहसमर्थो ऽपि संतोषपरश् च स्याद् इत्य् आपद्यते । यद् अपि श्रूयते "अनिच्छतः" अपीति[^३८६] (म्ध् ८.४१२), सो ऽर्थवादः । **शूद्रम्** एव **दास्यम्** इत्य् एवं सर्वत्र नियमरूपता द्रष्टव्या ॥ ८.४१० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Some people explain this text as follows:—“The *Vaiśya* and *Śūdra*
should he made to do the work here mentioned, even though they be
unwilling to do so; since such is their duty. Even though the law is
laid down for a visible purpose, yet from the very nature of the
restrictive injunction, it has to be regarded as indicating a
transcendental result also. Such being the sense of the text, it comes
to this that the Brāhmaṇa also should he forced to accept gifts. If it
be held that such acceptance has heen held, in certain cases, to be
improper, then the same may be said regarding the case in question
also.”

This however is not right. What the injunction contained in the verse
does is to lay down the methods to be adopted by certain men *if they
are desirous of acquiring wealth*; and it does not mean that they must
act as here laid down. man’s activity is not always determined by
injunctions; *i.e*., there is no need for an injunction in a case where
there is some motive already present. It is only in the *restriction*
that lies the use of the injunction; and the restriction in the present
case is that it is *the Vaiśya only* who should be made to carry on
trade; so that if any other man do that work, except in times of
distress, he should be punished by the king. Similarly it is the
*Brāhmaṇa only* who should accept gifts; but if he happens to be
contented, he may desist from receiving gifts, though quite capable of
receiving them. As regards the statement in verse 412 below, that is
purely declamatory. Similarly it is the *Śūdra only* who should be made
to perform service; and so on, the sense of the restriction may easily
he explained—(410)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 625).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.410-418)  
**

*Nārada* (18.4-6).—‘Sinful confusion of castes, the rules regarding
their means of subsistence and other subjects have been dealt with in
the Miscellaneous Chapter. The King shall he careful to protect all
orders and the constituent elements of his state with the four means
indicated by science. When any caste remains behind the rest, or exceeds
the limits assigned to it, the King, seeing that it has strayed from its
path, shall bring it back to the path of duty.’

*Gautama* (8.1-3).—‘A king and a deeply read Brāhmaṇa are the upholders
of moral order in the world; on them

depends the existence of the fourfold human race, of conscious beings,
of those that move on feet and on wings, and of those which creep—as
well as the protection of the offspring, the prevention of the confusion
of castes and the sacred law.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1.39-41).—‘The three lower castes shall live under the
guidance of the Brāhmaṇa;—he shall declare their duties;—and the King
shall govern them accordingly.’

*Hārīta* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 626).—‘The King is the ruler of men, in
regard to favours and punishments; he keeps in check people prone to
transgress the bounds of propriety and to misappropriate the property
and wives of others.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., 152).—‘The three lower castes may take to slavery, but
never the Brāhmaṇa. Among the various castes, the lower can be a slave
to the higher, but never the higher to the lower. Among, Kṣatriyas,
Vaiśyas and Śūdras there may be slavery among members of the same caste,
but a Brāhmaṇa should never be made to work as a slave. If a Brāhmaṇa is
made to work as a slave, the King’s glory fades away.’

*Nārada* (Do., pp. 144-145).—‘These first four kinds of slaves are never
freed from slavery, except through the masters’ favour. Of slaves, there
are fifteen varieties—(1) one born in the masters’ house, (2) bought,
(3) obtained as present, (4) inherited, (5) saved from starvation during
a famine, (6) one kept in pledge, (7) acquired by freeing him from debt,
(8) won in battle, (9) won by betting, (10) one who has surrendered
himself, (11) one fallen from renunciation, (12) one who has become a
slave for a limited period, (13) slave for fooding, (14) one who has
accepted slavery through his love for a slave-girl, and (15) one who has
sold himself.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 80).—‘If one puts up for sale a Śūdra who is a minor
or who is the very life of an Ārya, one shall be fined 12 Paṇas; one who
puts up a Vaiśya, 24 Paṇas; a Kṣatriya, 36 Paṇas; a Brāhmaṇa, 48 Paṇas.
This applies to cases where the boy is put up by his own relatives. If
it is done by strangers, the penalty shall be the three kinds of
*Death*; also for the buyers and those who witness the transaction. For
the Mlecchas there is no offence, if they sell or pledge their
offspring; but an Ārya can never be a slave.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.579).—‘The wife, the son and the slave,—these three
have no property; whatever they earn is the property of those to whom
they belong.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

वैश्यशूद्रौ वाणिज्यादिस्वकर्माकुर्वाणौ बलाद् राज्ञा कारयितव्यौ । अकुर्वाणौ च दण्डदण्ड्यौ स्याताम् । एवमर्थश् च राजधर्मे[षु पु]न[रारम्भः] ॥ ८.४०८ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

410	(The king) should order a Vaisya to trade, to lend money, to cultivate the land, or to tend cattle, and a Sudra to serve the twice-born castes
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/411_xatriya~n_chaiva.md">
<details open><summary><h3>411 क्षत्रियञ् चैव ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

क्षत्रियं चैव वैश्यं च  
ब्राह्मणो वृत्तिकर्शितौ ।  
बिभृयाद् आनृशंस्येन  
स्वानि कर्माणि कारयेत्  ॥ ८.४११ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/411_xatriya~n_chaiva.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

A Brāhmaṇa shall, through compassion, support a Vaiśya and a Kṣatriya, who are distressed for a livelihood, and should make them do his own work.—(411)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

[^३८७]**वृत्त्या कर्शितौ ब्राह्मणो बिभृयाद्** भक्तदानादिना, क्षत्रियवैश्ययोर् भरणं कुर्यात् । **आनृशंस्येन **अनुकम्पया **स्वानि कर्माणि कारयेत्**, ब्राह्मणस्य यानि स्वानि समित्कुशोदकुंभाहरणादीनि । अथ वा क्षत्रियवैशयोर् यानि स्वानि । क्षत्रियो ग्रामरक्षादौ नियोक्तव्यो वैश्यः स्वकृषिपसुपाल्यादौ । महाधनो यो ब्राह्मणो महापरिच्छदश्[^३८८] च सामर्थ्यात् तस्यैष विधिः । **स्वानि कर्माणीति** वचनात् दास्यं न[^३८९] कारयितव्यौ[^३९०] गर्हितोच्छिष्टमार्जनादि ॥ ८.४११ ॥


[^३९०]:
     M G: kārayitavyo


[^३८९]:
     M G omit: na


[^३८८]:
     M G: mahāpariṣac


[^३८७]:
     M G adds at the beginning: brāhmaṇasya ca
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa shall support them, if they are ‘*distressed for a
livelihood*,’ by giving them food and other things; *i.e*., he shall
support the *Kṣatriya* and the *Vaiśya*.

‘*Through compassion*’—through pity.

‘*Should make them do his own work*.’—The Brāhmaṇa’s ‘own work’ consists
in the fetching of fuel, water and such things.

Or, the meaning may be that he should make them perform such duties as
are the *Kṣatriya’s and the Vaiśya’s* own. That is, the *Kṣatriya*
should be employed in guarding the village and so forth, and the
*Vaiśya* in cultivating the land, tending the cattle and so on.

This law relates to the Brāhmaṇa who is possessed of much wealth and
property and is, as such, capable of supporting others.

‘*Own work*;’—the phrase implies that he should not employ them in
personal attendance, or in any such meat, work as the washing of unclean
things and the like.—(411)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 253), which explains
‘*svāni karmāṇi*’ as ‘duties prescribed for their respective castes’;—in
*Aparārka* (p. 789);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 126a), which
says that the meaning is that ‘if a Kṣatriya or a Vaiśya has become a
slave through want of living, his master should treat him well and take
light work from him.’
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.410-418)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.410].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

न तु दासकर्मणा वासोभाण्डधावनादिना । येन दासकर्मप्रतिषेधार्थो [कारयन्] इमौ स्वानि कर्माण्य् आनृशंस्येन भरणीयाव् एव ॥ ८.४०९ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

411	(Some wealthy) Brahmana shall compassionately support both a Kshatriya and a Vaisya, if they are distressed for a livelihood, employing them on work (which is suitable for) their (castes).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/412_dAsyan_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>412 दास्यन् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

दास्यं तु कारयंल् लोभाद्  
ब्राह्मणः संस्कृतान् द्विजान् ।  
अनिच्छतः प्राभवत्याद्  
राज्ञा दण्ड्यः शतानि षट्  ॥ ८.४१२ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/412_dAsyan_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

If the Brāhmaṇa, through the sense of mastery, and out of greed, makes sanctified twice-born persons do fertile work, against their will,—he should be fined by the king six hundred.—(412)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**संस्कृता** उपनीताः । यद्य् अपि द्विजग्रहणाद् एवैतल् लभ्यते तथापि त्रैवर्णिकजात्युपलक्षणार्थं न विज्ञायीति । यो **ब्राह्मणः** समानजातीयान् दास्यं पादधावनोच्छिष्टावकरणसंमार्जनादिरूपम्[^३९१] **अनिच्छतः** । प्रभवतो भावः[^३९२] **प्राभवत्यं** प्रभुत्वम् । शक्यातिशययोगतो बलादिना यः कारयति **स षट्शतानि दण्ड्यः** । **लोभाद्** एतत् । द्वेषादिभिस् त्व् अधिको दण्ड्यः । शत्रन्तस्य भवतेर् भावप्रत्यये प्राभवत्याद् इति रूपम् । प्रभुत्वेनेति वचनाद् गुरोर् न दोषः । **अनिच्छत** इति वचनाद् इच्छताम् अन्यो दण्डः ॥ ८.४१२ ॥


[^३९२]:
     M G J: vācaḥ


[^३९१]:
     M G: -karaṇasaṃmārjanādikaṃ rūpam
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Sanctified*’—those for whom the initiatory rite has been performed.
Though this is already implied by the term ‘*twice-born*’ itself, yet
the additional qualification has been added in order to guard against
this latter word being taken in the sense of all the three castes
promiscuously. The sense of the text is that if a Brāhmaṇa makes fellow
caste-men perform such ‘servile work’ as the washing of feet, the
removing of offal, sweeping and so forth,—‘*against their
will*’;—because he is their master,—*i.e*., possessed of the rights of
the master over them,—‘*he should be fined six hundred*,’— if he does it
‘*through greed*.’ If he does it through hatred and such other motives,
the fine shall be heavier.

The form ‘*prābhavatya*’ is an abstract noun formed from the present
participial term ‘*prabhavan*.’ And since the text speaks of
‘*mastery*,’ which implies the idea of master and servant, there would
be nothing wrong in the preceptor’s menial work being done by the pupil.

‘*Against their will*’—this shows that if they are willing, the fine
shall be very small.—(412)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 153), which has the
following notes:—‘*Prabhāvatvāt*’ (which is its reading for
‘*Prābhavatyāt*’), on account of being powerful,—‘*saṃskṛtān*,’ endowed
with character and learning if a Brāhmaṇa employs such twice-born men in
work unsuitable for them he should be fined 600 by the king.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 789), which explains ‘*prābhavatya*,’ as
‘*prabhavato bhāvaḥ*,’ *being powerful*;—600 *paṇas* are meant;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 126a), which explains ‘*prābhavatyāt*’ as
‘*prabhutvāt*’, and adds that the mention of ‘*dvijāti*’ makes it clear
that the penalty here prescribed does not refer to the case of *Śūdra*
-slaves.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.410-418)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.410].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

द्विजग्रहणाच् चात्र ब्राह्मणो ऽपि समानत्वा[द् । न] चैते इच्छन्तो ऽनिच्छन्तो वा दास्यं कारयितव्याः । एतावांस् तु विशेषः । अनिच्छतां करणे ऽयं दण्डः । इच्छतां तु करणे कल्पयितव्यः । एवम् अर्थं च राजधर्मेषूक्तम् इदम् इति ॥ ८.४१० ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

412	But a Brahmana who, because he is powerful, out of greed makes initiated (men of the) twice-born (castes) against their will do the work of slaves, shall be fined by the king six hundred (panas).
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/413_shUdran_tu.md">
<details open><summary><h3>413 शूद्रन् तु ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

शूद्रं तु कारयेद् दास्यं  
क्रीतम् अक्रीतम् एव वा ।  
दास्यायैव हि सृष्टो ऽसौ  
ब्राह्मणस्य स्वयंभुवा  ॥ ८.४१३ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/413_shUdran_tu.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

But a Śūdra, whether bought or unbought, he shall make to do servile work; since it is for doing servile work for the Brāhmaṇa that he has been created by the self-born one.—(413)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**क्रीतम् अक्रीतं** भक्ताद्युपनतम् । वक्ष्यमाणस्य विधेर् अनुवादो ऽयम् । **दास्यायैवे**त्य् अर्थवादः ॥ ८.४१३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

‘*Bought or unbought*’—*i.e*., engaged on fooding.

This is a reference to the law going to be laid down below (under 415).

‘*It is for doing servile work, etc*.’—this is purely declamatory.—(413)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 154), which explains the
meaning to be that a *Śūdra* may be made to do even the meanest service.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.410-418)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.410].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

भक्तदासक्रीतयोर् अयं कर्तव्यतायां विशेषो नास्ति । ब्राह्मणग्रहणं च द्विजातिप्रदर्शनार्थम् ॥ ८.४११ ॥

_एवं च सति —_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

413	But a Sudra, whether bought or unbought, he may compel to do servile work; for he was created by the Self-existent (Svayambhu) to be the slave of a Brahmana.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/414_na_svAminA.md">
<details open><summary><h3>414 न स्वामिना ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

न स्वामिना निसृष्टो ऽपि  
शूद्रो दास्याद् विमुच्यते ।  
निसर्गजं हि तत् तस्य  
कस् तस्मात् तद् अपोहति  ॥ ८.४१४ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/414_na_svAminA.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Even though set free by the master, the Śūdra is not released from service; since that is innate in him, and who can release him from it?—(414)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

यम् आश्रितः सप्तभिर् दासयोनिभिस्[^३९३] तेन **निसृष्टो ऽपि** तन्मुक्तो ऽपि[^३९४] ।[^३९५] किं तु **निसर्गजं** सहजं जतिसहभावि **कः**[^३९६] **तस्माच्** छूद्रात् **तद्** दास्यम्[^३९७] **अपोहति** अपनयति । यथा शूद्रजातिर् न तस्यापनेतुं शक्या, एवं दास्यम् अपि । अर्थवादो ऽयम् । यतो वक्ष्यति निमित्तविशेषे शूद्रस्य[^३९८] दास्यान् मोक्षः ॥ ८.४१४ ॥


[^३९८]:
     M G add: vā


[^३९७]:
     M G: chūdro dāsyam


[^३९६]:
     M G: jatisahabhāvikam 


[^३९५]:
     J adds: na svāminā nisṛṣṭo 'pi dāsyād vimucyate; M G add: na svāminā nisṛṣṭo 'pi 


[^३९४]:
     M G omit: tanmukto 'pi


[^३९३]:
     M G: dāśayonibhis
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

Even though ‘*set free*’ by the master to whom he belongs, by the seven
modes of slavery,—*i.e*., even though emancipated by him.

Service is ‘*innate in him*,’— is in the very nature of his caste.

Who can therefore release the *Śūdra* from servitude? Just as the
Śūdra-caste cannot be removed from him, so also servitude.

This is purely declamatory; since it is going to be declared later on
that under special circumstances, the Śūdra does become released from
*servitude*.—(414)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 146), which adds the
following:—Even through the favour of the owner of the Śūdra-slave,
there is no freedom for the latter from the lowest service or slavery.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 786);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (97a),
which explains the meaning as that howsoever favourably inclined he may
be towards either the borne Śūdra or to the bought slave, cannot absolve
him from servitude.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.410-418)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.410].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

यथैवाध्यापनादि ब्राह्मणादीनां निसर्गजम् एवं शूद्रस्य [दास्यम्] । यथैतत् तेन कर्तव्यम् इत्य् उक्तम् एव शास्त्रे ॥ ८.४१२ ॥

_तत्प्रसङ्गेन चेमे **दासयोनय** उच्यन्ते ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

414	A Sudra, though emancipated by his master, is not released from servitude; since that is innate in him, who can set him free from it?
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/415_dhvajAhRto_bhaktadAso.md">
<details open><summary><h3>415 ध्वजाहृतो भक्तदासो ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

ध्वजाहृतो भक्तदासो  
गृहजः क्रीत-दत्त्रिमौ ।  
पैत्रिको दण्डदासश् च  
सप्तैते दासयोनयः  ॥ ८.४१५ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/415_dhvajAhRto_bhaktadAso.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

There are seven kinds of slaves—(1) captured under a banner, (2) slave on food, (3) born in the house, (4) bought, (5) presented, (6) hereditary, and (7) slave by punishment.—(415)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

**ध्वज**ग्रहणं वाहनोपलक्षणार्थम् । ध्वजिनी सेनोच्यते । तत **आहृतः** । संग्रामे जितः सन् दासीकृतः । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;किं पुनर् इदं क्षत्रियस्य वचनम्, युद्धे जितः क्षत्रियो दासीभवति । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;नेति ब्रूमः, शूद्रस्यैव प्रकृतत्वात्, "दास्यायैव सृष्टो ऽसौ" (म्ध् ८.४१३) इति । स्वामिनं जित्वा तदीयो दास **आहृतः** । आहर्तुर् दास्यं प्रतिपद्यते । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु शूद्रस्य विशेषेणैव दास्यम् उक्तम्, "निसर्गजं तत् तस्य" (म्ध् ८.४१४) इति ।

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;नैवम् । तथा सत्य् अव्यवस्था स्यात्, कस्यासौ दास इति न विज्ञायते । सर्वे हि त्रैवर्णिकास् तस्य दास्याः[^३९९] । स्वधर्मम् अनुवृत्तस्य[^४००] चानियमो ऽविधित्वात् । 


[^४००]:
     M G DK: pūrvāparanaravataś


[^३९९]:
     M G: dāsāḥ; DK: traivarṇikāḥ svasvadāsāḥ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अन्ये तु[^४०१] "सर्वे चोत्तरोत्तरं परिचरेयुः" (ग्ध् १०.६६) इति क्षत्रियादीनाम् अपि दास्यम् अस्ति । 


[^४०१]:
     M G: 'vidhitvāt | tasya tu na te sarva evottare; DK: 'vidhitvāt tasya | nanu te sarva cottarottare

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;तद् असत् । अन्यद् दास्यम्, अन्या परिचर्या । निकृष्टकर्मकारित्वम् अप्य् अज्ञातस्य दास्यम् । सर्वस्य प्रेषितस्याप्रतिबन्धः[^४०२] । परिचर्या तु शरीरसंवाहनम् अर्थदारादिरक्षाधिकारः[^४०३] । नारदेन चैतत् प्रपञ्चितम् (न्स्म् ५.२४–४२) । 


[^४०३]:
     M G: arthadārādinā


[^४०२]:
     M G: sarvasyāpreṣita-

- भक्तलाभार्थं दास्यं प्रतिपन्नो **भक्तदासः** । गृहे जातो **गृहजः** । दास्याम् उत्पन्नो गर्भदासः । **क्रीतो** बूल्येन स्वामिनः सकाशात् । **दत्रिमः** प्रीत्यादृष्टार्थं वा दत्तः । क्रमागतः **पैत्रिकः** । अथ गृहजस्यास्य च को विशेषः । गृहजस् तदीयायाम् एव दास्यां जात इतरस् तु क्रमागतः । **दण्डदासो** राज्ञे दण्डं दातुम् अशक्तो दासीक्रियते । 

- "कर्मणापि समं कुर्यात्" (म्ध् ८.१७७) इत्य् अवर्णस्यापि दास्यम् <u>इच्छन्ति</u> । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;तद् अयुक्तम् । अन्यद् दास्यम् अन्यच् च तत्कर्मकारित्वम् । न चायं दण्डो येनान्तर्भवेत् । न च दासयोनिपुरुषधारणम् उक्तम्, केवलं कर्मणापीति । तथा दासकर्माप्य् अस्ति । 

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च धर्मोपनतो ऽपि शूद्रो दास इष्यते । तत्र कथं **सप्त दासयोनयः** । 

<u>नैष दोषः</u> । न तस्योत्पत्तिकं दासत्वम् । इच्छाधीनत्वाद् धर्मार्थिनः । न हि तस्य दानाधानक्रिया युज्यन्ते,[^४०४] क्रीतगृहजादिदासवत् । एवं ह्य् उक्तम्- "यथा यथा हि सद्वृत्तम्" (म्ध् १०.१२८) इति । तेनैवं ब्रुवतैतत् प्रदर्शितं भवति- न तस्य नित्यं दास्यं किं तर्हि फलविशेषार्थिनः । ततश् चानिच्छतो न[^४०५] दास्यम् अस्ति । अतो यदि शूद्रो विद्यमानधनः[^४०६] स्वातन्त्र्येण जीवेद् ब्राह्मणाद्यनपाश्रितो न जातु दुष्येत् ॥ ८.४१५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

The term ‘*Dhvajā*’ ‘*banner*’ stands for the *chariot*;

hence ‘*Dhvajinī*’ means the *army*; ho who is captured ‘*under the
banner*’ is the captive of war, who is made a slave.

“What is stated here,—does it refer to the *Kṣatriya*,—the meaning being
that the Kṣatriya made captive in war becomes a slave?”

Not so, we reply; since it is the *Śūdra* that forms the subject-matter
of the context; as is clear from the preceding statement—‘it is for the
purpose of servitude that he has been created.’ What the text refers to
is the case where the owner of the slave having been defeated in battle,
the slave is brought over and enslaved by the captor.

“as a matter of fact, servitude has been declared to be for *all
Śūdras*—when for instance it was asserted that servitude is ‘innate in
him.’”

It is not so; for in that case there would be a great confusion; as it
would not be ascertained to whom a certain slave belongs; since all the
three higher castes would be their masters, to be served by them. Hence
there would be no restriction. Then again, all that has been asserted
before (regarding servitude being ‘innate’ in the *Śūdra* and all that)
is not of the nature of an injunction. Further, there is the declaration
that ‘among the castes each of the following shall serve the preceding’
(Gautama, 10.66),—by which the *Kṣatriya* and the *Vaiṣhya* also would
have to be regarded as slaves.

All this however is not right. ‘Serving’ is one thing and ‘slavery’ is
another. Slavery consists in doing servile work, and in not objecting to
going anywhere he may be sent to; while ‘service’ may consist in
shampooing the body, guarding the family or property and so forth. All
this has been dealt with in detail by Nārada.

‘*Slave on food*’—he who has accepted slavery for obtaining food.

‘*Born in the house*’—*i.e*., born of a slave-girl.

‘*Bought*’—from the former master, for a price.

‘*Presented*’—given to one, either through love, or for the purpose of
acquiring spiritual merit.

‘*Hereditary*’—who has belonged to the family through a line of
ancestors.

“What is the difference between this last and the slave *born in the
house*?”

The latter is one born of a slave-girl that may have been acquired by
the master himself, while the other is hereditary.

‘*Enslaved for punishment*’—one who, being incapable of paying the
king’s fines, is made a slave.

In fact, according to some people, such slaves are possible for the
other castes also, in view of what has been said regarding the propriety
of repaying a debt even by manual labour.

But this is not right; as ‘slavery’ is one thing and ‘doing manual work’
is something totally different. Nor is the case cited a case of
‘punishment,’ whereby it could be included under the present head. Then
again, when it is said that debts may be repaid ‘by manual work also,’
it does not necessarily mean ‘slavery,’ though this also may be one kind
of ‘work.’

“When the *Śūdra* works as a slave entirely through considerations of
his duty, why should there be only *seven* kinds of slaves?”

There is no force in this objection. Because in his case ‘slavery’ is
not innate in him; it is purely voluntary wish him; he having recourse
to it only with a view to acquiring merit. And further, such a slave
cannot be given away or pledged;—as the bought and house-born slaves
can. In fact the *Śūdra* in question is guided by what has been declared
(under 10.128) regarding the Śūdra ‘imitating the behaviour of the
virtuous, etc., etc.’; and by this it is clearly implied that slavery is
not inherent in him; he takes to it only with a view to a definite
result. Hence there is real ‘slavery’ only when it is involuntary. So
that if a *Śūdra* has property of his own and lives upon it, not
supporting himself by depending upon the Brāhmaṇa and others, he does
nothing wrong.—(415)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

*Cf*. 8.49, 177 and 9.229.

‘*Dhvajāhṛtaḥ*’—‘Captured in war’ (Medhātithi);—‘who has become a slave
by marrying a slave-girl’ (Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Daṇḍadāsaḥ*’—‘Enslaved for debt’ (Medhātithi);—‘enslaved for having
abandoned a religious order’. (Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 789), which explains
‘*daṇḍadāsa*’ as ‘one who has been enslaved in payment of fine imposed,’
and adds that the list here given is not meant to be exhaustive.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.181), which remarks that the list is not
exhaustive; and *Bālambhaṭṭī* explains ‘*dhvajadāsa*’ as ‘a captive of
war,’—‘*daṇḍadāsa*’ as ‘one who has abandoned a religious order and has
not performed the consequent expiatory rite, and has thereupon, by way
of punishment, been made by the king a life-long slave.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 240), which also notes
that the list is not exhaustive.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.410-418)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.410].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

**ध्वजाहृतो** युद्धनिर्जितः । **भक्तदास** उदरप्रविष्टः । **गृहजो** दासीपुत्रः । **कृईतदत्त्रिमौ** प्रसिद्धौ । **पैत्रिको** दासीपुत्रः पितृपर्यायागतः । दण्डदासस् त्व् अविद्यमानधनो दण्डितः दण्डेनात्मानं प्रवेशयति । एताः सप्त **दासयोनयः** । आसाम् मध्ये अन्यतमयाप्य् उपेतो दासाख्यं लभते । यस् तु विद्यमानविभवः शूद्रः स्वशक्त्या जीवति नासौ परमार्थतो दासो वेदितव्यः । इतरथास्यानर्थक्यम् अस्य दासयोन्यर्थस्य श्लोकस्य स्यात् ॥ ८.४१३ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

415	There are slaves of seven kinds, (viz.) he who is made a captive under a standard, he who serves for his daily food, he who is born in the house, he who is bought and he who is given, he who is inherited from ancestors, and he who is enslaved by way of punishment.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/416_bhAryA_putrash.md">
<details open><summary><h3>416 भार्या पुत्रश् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

भार्या पुत्रश् च दासश् च  
त्रय एवाऽधनाः स्मृताः ।  
यत् ते समधिगच्छन्ति  
यस्य ते तस्य तद् धनम्  ॥ ८.४१६ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/416_bhAryA_putrash.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The wive, the son and the slave,—these three are declared to have no property; whatever they acquire is the property of him to whom they belong.—(416)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

एते त्रयो ऽर्जितधना अप्य् **अधनाः** । स्वामिनो धनम् । यत् किंचित् ते धनम् अर्जयन्ति, **तद् धनं** **तस्य** स्वं यस्य ते स्वत्वम्[^४०७] आपन्नाः । भार्याधनं भर्तुः, पितुः पुत्रस्य, स्वामिनो दासस्य । 


[^४०७]:
     M G: satvam

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;ननु च यद्य् एते निर्धनाः कथम् एषां कर्मभिर् अधिकारः । तत्रेदं नोपपद्यते- "पुत्रौ चेद् आहिताग्नी स्यातां येभ्यः पिता दद्यात् तेभ्यः पुत्रः" इति । दम्पत्योर् अपि सहजधर्मश् चरितव्यः- "धर्मे चार्थे च कामे च नातिचरितव्या त्वया" इति । यदि च निर्धना[^४०८] को ऽन्यो ऽर्थे[^४०९] ऽनतिचारः । शूद्रस्यापि "पाकयज्ञैः स्वयं यजेत" (ग्ध् १०.६५) इति निर्धनत्वे विरुध्यते । स्वच्छन्दशूद्रविषयत्वेन विरोधो न भवेत् । अस्ति तावद् दासानां स्वधने स्वाम्यम्, यदा स्वधनम् इति व्यपदिश्यते । न ह्य् असति संबन्धे व्यपदेशः । अर्जनं च स्वत्वं नापादयतीति विप्रतिषिद्धम् । तस्माद् विरुद्धम् इदं **यत् ते समधिगच्छन्ति** न तत् तेषां स्वम् इति[^४१०] । यथा कश्चिद् ब्रूयात्- "यस्या अहं पुत्रः सा न[^४११] मम जननी" इति, तादृग् एतत् । असति वा स्त्रीणां स्वाम्ये- "पत्न्यैव रतम् अनुमतं[^४१२] क्रियते," "पत्नी वै पारिणह्यस्येशे" (म्स् ३.७.९) इत्यादि श्रुतयो निरालम्बनाः स्युः । 


[^४१२]:
     M G DK: patnyaivānugamanaṃ; J: patnyai vā tadanumataṃ; my reading "ratam" is taken from MS reading.


[^४११]:
     M G omit: na


[^४१०]:
     M G: svāmini; DK: svāmitvam


[^४०९]:
     M G: 'nyārthe


[^४०८]:
     M G: nirdhanaḥ; J: nirdhanāḥ

- span style="text-decoration-underline;"&gt;अत्रोच्यते । पारतन्त्र्यविधानम् एतत् । असत्यां भर्तुर् अनुज्ञायां न स्त्रीभिः स्वातन्त्र्येण यत्र क्वचिद् धनं विनियोक्तव्यम् । एवं पुत्रदास्योर् अपि द्रष्टव्यम् । 

<u>अन्ये</u> तु मन्यन्ते- भार्यापुत्रग्रहणं दासार्थम् । तस्य चैतद् वचनम् उत्तरार्थम् । आपदि तासां धनग्रहणे न विचिकित्सितव्यम्, भर्तुर् एव हि तत् स्वम् ॥ ८.४१६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

These three are without property, even though they may acquire property.
Property can belong to one *who has possession*; while whatever property
the said persons acquire is in the possession of him to whom they
themselves belong; so that the property of the wife belongs to the
husband, that of the son to the father and that of the slave to the
master.

“If these persons have no property, how can they be entitled to the
performance of any rites? So that it would not be right to assert
that—‘if two sons should have kindled the consecrated fire, they should
offer the oblations to those for whom the father offers them.’ Then
again, it is necessary for the husband and wife to perform religious
rites jointly, the husband being exhorted not to ignore the wife in
matters relating to religious acts, pleasure and wealth? If however the
wife has no property, what would be her *ignoring* in regard to wealth?
Further, the *Śūdra* also has got to make certain offerings of cooked
food; and this also would be incompatible with the fact of his having no
property. There would be no such incompatibility if the injunction
regarding these offerings were taken as referring to such *Śūdras* as
are free (and hence possess property). But as a matter of fact, *slaves*
also have proprietary rights over their property, whioh is, on that
account, called their *own property*. For these reasons it is wrong to
say that ‘*what they acquire is the property of him to whom they
belong*.’ This is exactly like the assertion ‘she whose son I am is not
my mother.’ Further, if women had no proprietary right, there would be
no sense in such śruti-declarations as—‘the wife should obey,’ ‘the wife
should follow in the footsteps of her marrier’ and so forth.”

Our answer to the above is, as follows:—What is meant by the text is
only that they are *dependent, subservient*; the meaning being that
‘without the husband’s sanction, the wife should not employ her wealth
anywhere she may choose.’ Similarly with the son and the slave.

Others however hold that the ‘wife’ and the ‘son’ have been mentioned
only by way of illustrating the status of the slave; and the latter is
mentioned for the purpose of declaring, in reference to him alone, what
follows in the next verse, which means that in times of distress the
master should feel no hesitation in taking what belongs to the slave; as
in reality it is the master’s own property.—(416)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 572).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.410-418)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.410].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

भार्यापुत्रग्रहणम् अत्र दासदृष्टान्तर्थं तत्समानत्वाद् एतत्प्रकरणे ऽस्वार्थम् । एवं च सति त्रयाणाम् अप्य् एषां निर्धनत्वं न परमार्थतः । किं तर्हि ततनुज्ञातद्र[व्य]व्यवहारार्थं विज्ञेयम् । कस्य पुनर् हेतोः । येन यद् उपार्ज्यते न तत् तस्माद् व्यावर्तयितुं शक्यते । अद्रव्यत्वे चैषां पुत्रादीनां कर्मभिर् असंबन्धः स्यात् । न चैतद् इष्टम्, शास्त्रशिष्टत्वात् तेषां कर्मणः । एवं च सति गौणम् एषां निर्धनत्वं विज्ञेयम् । उत्तरार्थं च ॥ ८.४१४ ॥

_यतश् चैतद् एवम् अतः ।_
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

416	A wife, a son, and a slave, these three are declared to have no property; the wealth which they earn is (acquired) for him to whom they belong.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/417_visrabdham_brAhmaNaH.md">
<details open><summary><h3>417 विस्रब्धम् ब्राह्मणः ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

विस्रब्धं ब्राह्मणः शूद्राद्  
द्रव्योपादानम् आचरेत् ।  
न हि तस्याऽस्ति किं चित् स्वं  
भर्तृहार्य-धनो हि सः  ॥ ८.४१७ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/417_visrabdham_brAhmaNaH.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The Brāhmaṇa may confidently have recourse to seizing the goods of the Śūdra; as the latter has no property, and his property is meant to be seized by the master.—(417)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

तथा च <u>कश्चिद्</u> आह- धर्मोपगतशूद्रविषयम् इदम् । 

<u>तद् उक्तम्</u>, विशेषे प्रमाणाभावात् । तस्मात् सर्वस्य दासः शूद्रस् तस्यैव प्रतिग्राह्यत्वम् उच्यते ।   
**विस्रब्धं** निःशङ्कम् । शूद्रधनं कथं प्रतिगृह्णीयात्, प्रतिषिद्धं हि तत्, इत्य् एषा शङ्का न[^४१३] कर्तव्या । यतो **न** **तस्य किंचिद्** अर्थो यस्य निचयः स्याद् इत्य् उक्तं भवति । **भर्त्रा** स्वामिना ह्रियते धनम् अस्य,[^४१४] एतद् एवार्जने तस्य प्रयोजनम्, स्वामी गृह्णाति[^४१५] । अतो **विस्रब्धं**[^४१६] द्रव्योपादानं[^४१७] द्रव्यग्रहणं कुर्यात् । तेनानुपनीयमानम्[^४१८] अपि स्वगृहस्थम् इव[^४१९] विनियुञ्जीत । सति प्रयोजन एतद् युक्तं भवति । अविद्यमानधनस्य दासाच् छूद्रात् प्रतिगृह्णतो न दोषः ॥ ८.४१७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In this connection some people assert that what is stated hero is in
reference to the *Śūdra* who has volunteered, through religious motives,
to be a slave.

This however is not right; as there is nothing to show that it refers to
any particular case. Hence what is meant is that the Brāhmaṇa may take
the wealth of the *Śūdra* who is the slave of all.

‘*Confidently*’—without hesitation. He should never have any such doubt
as to how he can seize the *Śūdra’s* goods, such seizing being
forbidden. Since there is no property that really belongs to the
*Śūdra*. Specially because in such cases the *master* is not deprived of
his possession; since the *Śūdra* acquires property only for the purpose
that his master may make use of it. Hence the Brāhmaṇa should seize the
goods ‘*confidently*.’ Even where it is presented by the *Śūdra*, he
should use it as if it had been in his own house.

It is only when there is actual need that this can be right. Hence it is
only when the Brāhmaṇa has no property of his own that he incurs no sin
by seizing the goods of his *Śūdra-slave*.—(417)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.410-418)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.410].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

दासाधिकाराद् दासः । शूद्रात् तस्मात् तत्स्वामिने । नाब्राह्मणस्य प्रतिग्रहपक्षो द्रष्टव्यो ब्राह्मणस्य स्वदासप्रतिग्रहः । अथ वेतरस्माच् छूद्राद् अदासाल् लघीयान् अयं प्रतिग्रहो विज्ञेयः । न ह्य् अकस्मात् ततः प्रशंसावर्षवचनं युक्तम् । न तु शूद्रस्येत्तंभूतस्यापि द्विजातिभिः साम्यं युक्तं कर्तुम् इति । यत एवमभिप्राय एवायं निर्देशो वेदितव्यः ॥ ८.४१५ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

417	A Brahmana may confidently seize the goods of (his) Sudra (slave); for, as that (slave) can have no property, his master may take his possessions.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/418_vaishya-shUdrau_prayatnena.md">
<details open><summary><h3>418 वैश्य-शूद्रौ प्रयत्नेन ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

वैश्य-शूद्रौ प्रयत्नेन  
स्वानि कर्माणि कारयेत् ।  
तौ हि च्युतौ स्वकर्मभ्यः  
क्षोभयेताम् इदं जगत्  ॥ ८.४१८ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/418_vaishya-shUdrau_prayatnena.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king shall make the Vaiśya and the Shudra carefully to perform their duties; for by swerving from their duties they would disturb this world.—(418)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

कर्म व्यतिक्रामन्तः क्षोभयेयुर् आकुलीकुर्युर् जगदत् । अतस् ते **प्रयत्नेन** **स्वकर्मभ्यश्** च्यावयितुं न लभेरन्[^४२०] । अनल्प[^४२१] एवातिक्रामे भूयसा दण्डेन योजनीया वैश्या अपि । बन्धनं नास्ति । अपि धनशक्यः स्वधर्मः ॥ ८.४१८ ॥


[^४२१]:
     DK: alpa


[^४२०]:
     M G: cāvayed; DK reads: atas tān prayatnena svakarmāṇi kārayet
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

By neglecting their own duties they would ‘*disturb*’—throw into
confusion —‘*this world*.’ Hence the king should carefully see to it
that they do not swerve from their duties. Even Vaiśyas should be
punished, with a heavy fine, even on a slight transgression. Though
there is to be no imprisonment for him, yet money-penalties are quite
possible.—(418)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 625).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

**(verses 8.410-418)  
**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
8.410].
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

"वाणिज्यं कारयेद् विश्यम्" इत्य् अस्य श्लोकस्य प्रकरणात् प्रयत्नतः स्वकर्म कारयितव्या [इति] विशेषेणादाव् उक्तस्यायम् उपसंहारार्थः श्लोकः । अथ वा शूद्रो द्वैजातं कर्म कुर्वन् धर्मसंकराज् जगतो महद् भयं विदधाति । वैश्यो ऽपि कृष्यादिष्व् अवर्तमानो ऽन्नादिक्षयात् । तस्माद् इमौ राज्ञा प्रयत्नतः स्वकर्मकारयितव्यौ विशेषेण । न च तयोर् निर्देशाद् ब्राह्मणक्षत्रिययोर् एतद् अनुपदिष्टं भवति । विशेषार्थश् चारम्भो वैश्यशूद्रयोर् विज्ञेयः ॥ ८.४१६ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

418	(The king) should carefully compel Vaisyas and Sudra to perform the work (prescribed) for them; for if these two (castes) swerved from their duties, they would throw this (whole) world into confusion.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/419_ahany_ahany.md">
<details open><summary><h3>419 अहन्य् अहन्य् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

अहन्य् अहन्य् अवेक्षेत  
कर्मान्तान् वाहनानि च ।  
आय-व्ययौ च नियताव्  
आकरान् कोशम् एव च  ॥ ८.४१९ ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/419_ahany_ahany.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

Day after day he shall look after his business-centres, his conveyances, his income and expenditure regularly, and mines and treasury.—(419)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

राजधर्माणाम् अनुसंधानार्थम् । **कर्मान्ताः** कृषिशुल्कस्थानादयः[^४२२] । **वाहनम्**[^४२३] हस्त्यादि । **आयव्ययम्**[^४२४] इदम् अस्य प्रविष्टम्, इदं निर्यातम्, इत्य् एव[^४२५] सततं गवेषणीयम् । **आकराः** धातवः सुवर्णाद्युत्पादे भवन्ति भूमयः । **कोशः** द्रव्यनिचयस्थानम्[^४२६] ॥ ८.४१९ ॥


[^४२६]:
     M G DK: dravyaniścalasthānam


[^४२५]:
     DK: evaṃ


[^४२४]:
     DK (4: 949): āyavyayau (but not DK 1: 823)


[^४२३]:
     DK: vāhanāni


[^४२२]:
     M G: kṛṣiśulkasthānādapa; DK: kṛṣiśulkasthānāni (DK 4: 949 has the reading adopted)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

This verse shows the purpose of indicating all the duties of the king.

‘*Business-centres*’—agricultural stations, customs-house and so forth.

‘*Conveyances*’—elephants and the rest.

‘*Income and expenditure*’—so much has come in, and so much has been
spent. This should be looked into ‘*regularly*,’ constantly.

‘*Mines*’—places whence gold and other minerals are brought out.

‘*Treasure*’—the place where money is deposited.—(419)
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

‘*Karmāntān*’—‘Completion of his undertakings’ (Kullūka);—‘the works,
such as agriculture and the rest’; (Medhātithi, Govindarāja and
Nandana);—‘workshops’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 155).
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-तुल्य-वाक्यानि</summary>

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 154).—‘Towards the end of
the night the King shall listen to an account of his income and
expenditure.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.325).—‘After having made arrangements for safety, he
shall himself examine his income and expenditure.’
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

लोकस्थित्यर्थस्य राज्यतन्त्रहेतोश् च पौरजानपदानां व्यवहारजातस्यानुरोधेनेति व्यवहारदर्शन[ं कृत्वा] ॥ ८.४१७ ॥
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

419	Let him daily look after the completion of his undertakings, his beasts of burden, and carriages, (the collection of) his revenues and the disbursements, his mines and his treasury.
</details>
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include" includetitle="true" newlevelforh1="3" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/vishvAsa-prastutiH/08/420_evaM_sarvAn.md">
<details open><summary><h3>420 एवं सर्वान् ...{Loading}...</h3></summary>

एवं सर्वान् इमान् राजा  
व्यवहारान् समापयन् ।  
व्यपोह्य किल्बिषं सर्वं  
प्राप्नोति परमां गतिम्  ॥ ८.४२० ॥
</details>
</div>
<div class="js_include collapsed" newlevelforh1="4" title="सर्वाष् टीकाः" unfilled url="/kalpAntaram/smRtiH/manuH/sarvASh_TIkAH/08/420_evaM_sarvAn.md">
<details><summary><h4>सर्वाष् टीकाः ...{Loading}...</h4></summary>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-मूलानुवादः</summary>

The king who completes all this business, removes all sin and attains the highest state.—(420)
</details>
<details><summary>मेधातिथिः</summary>

उक्तेन प्रकारेण **व्यवहारान्** ऋणादीन् **समापयन्** निर्णयावसानं कुर्वन् यत् किंचित् तत् सर्वम् अविज्ञातदोषं तत् **सर्वं** **व्यपोह्य** अपनुद्य पापं **परमां गतिम्** अभिप्रेतां स्वर्गापवर्गभूमिं **प्राप्नोति** लभते ॥ ८.४२० ॥

**इति मानवे धर्मशास्त्रे भृगुप्रोक्तायां संहितायां **

**राजधर्मे व्यवहारनिर्णये सामान्यव्यवहारो नाम अष्टमो ऽध्यायः ॥**

**इति श्रीभट्टवीरस्वामिसूनोर् भट्टमेधातिथिकृते**

**मनुभाष्ये ऽष्टमो ऽध्यायः ॥**
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-भाष्यानुवादः</summary>

In the aforesaid manner the king who completes all the ‘*business*’
relating to the *Nonpayment of debts* and the rest,—*i.e*., carries them
to their end,—removes all kinds of sin, and attains ‘*the highest
state*’ secured by him, in the shape of Heaven and Liberation.—(420)

Thus ends the *Bhāṣya* on Discourse VIII.
</details>
<details><summary>गङ्गानथ-टिप्पन्यः</summary>

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 396).
</details>
<details><summary>भारुचिः</summary>

राज्ञो यथोक्तव्यवहारदर्शनस्य शास्त्रसामर्थ्यात् फलविधिर् अयम् । तदनुष्ठा[न सामा]न्याच् चायं व्यवहारोपसंहारः पूर्वेषां व्यवहारनित्तानाम् अपरिसमाप्तेष्व् अपि व्यवहारास्पदेषु स्त्रीपुंधर्मप्रभृतिषु चतुर्ष्व् अपीति ॥ ८.४१८ ॥

**इति भारुचेः कृताव् अष्टमो ऽध्यायः ।**
</details>
<details><summary>Bühler</summary>

420	A king who thus brings to a conclusion. all the legal business enumerated above, and removes all sin, reaches the highest state (of bliss).
</details>
</details>
</div>
