+++
title = "008 सो ऽभिध्याय"

+++
‘*He*’—who,—by virtue of the qualities described in the preceding verse,
and also by virtue of such Vedic texts as ‘In the beginning there
appeared Hiraṇyagarbha &c.’ (Ṛgveda 10.121.1)—acquired the title of
‘*Hiraṇyagarbha*.’

‘*Several kinds of created things*’—things possessed of various forms.

‘*Desiring to create*,’—wishing to bring into existence.

‘*In the beginning*,’ first of all—‘produced,’ called into
being—‘*water*’ ‘*out of his own body*,’ *i.e*., the body assumed by
himself (on manifestation). Or, according to the Ádvaita Philosophy,
‘Primordial Matter’ is the ‘body’ of Hiraṇyagarbha here spoken of; it is
‘*his own*’ in the sense that it follows his wish, and is the cause of
the production of all bodies.

The next question that arises is—“When he created the body of all living
beings, did he do so by means of some physical act, such as digging with
the spade and so forth (as the potter does in the making of the Jar)?”

The answer is *no*.—“How then?”—‘*By mere willing*’—by the mere act of
wishing ‘let water be produced.’

The following further question is raised—“Since the Earth and other
things were non-existent at the time, what was the receptacle or
standing ground of the water that was produced?”

The question is addressed to the winds! \[ *lit*., it is as good as
addressed to others!\]. It might just as well bo asked—what is the
receptacle or standing ground for the Supreme Lord himself when he has
assumed a body. If it be explained that so far as the powers of the
creator himself are concerned, no questions arise, for the simple reason
that he is possessed of unique powers,—then the same may be said in
regard to water and the other products also, which may be regarded as
having similar unique powers.

*In that*, water, *he threw*, scattered, *the seed*, the semen. (8)


