+++ title = "01 Topics of Dharmaśāstra"

+++

 Manifold are the topics that have been included under Dharmaśāstra from very ancient times. The Dharma-sūtras of Gautama, Baudhāyana, Āpastamba and Vasiṣṭha deal in greater or less detail principally with the following subjects: the several _varṇas_ (classes), _āśramas_ (stages of life), their privileges, obligations and responsibilities; the _saṁskāras_ performed on an individual (from _garbhādhāna_ to _antyeṣṭi_); the duties of the _brahmacārin_ (the first āśrama); _anadhyāyas_ (holidays on which Vedic study was stopped); the duties of a _snātaka_ (one who has finished the first stage of life); _vivāha_ (marriage) and all matters connected therewith; the duties of the _gṛhastha_ (house-holder's stage); _śauca_ (daily purification of body); the five daily _yajñas_; _dāna_ (gifts); _bhakṣyābhakṣya_ (what food should one partake of and what not); _śuddhi_ (purification of persons, vessels, clothes &c.); _āśauca_ (impurity on birth and death); _antyeṣṭi_ (rites on death); _śrāddha_ (rites performed for the deceased ancestors and relatives); _strīdharma_ (special duties of women) and _strīpuṁdharma_ (duties of husband and wife); _dharmas_ of _kṣatriyas_ and of kings; _vyavahāra_ (judicial procedure, and the sphere of substantive law such as crimes and punishments, contracts, partition and inheritance, adoption, gambling &c.); the four principal classes, mixed castes and their proper avocations; _āpaddharma_ (actions and avocations permitted to the several castes in extreme difficulties); _prāyaścitta_ (sins and how to expiate them); _karmavipāka_ (results of evil deeds done in past lives); _śānti_ (rites on the happening of portents or for propitiating the planets &c.); duties of _vānaprastha_ (forest hermit) and _saṁnyāsin_ (ascetic). All these subjects are not treated in any fixed or settled order in the sūtra works. To take only one example, the subject of partition and inheritance occurs at the end of the dharmasūtra of Gautama, while Vasiṣṭha places the same subject in the middle of his work (17th chapter) and Āpastamba deals with those topics after finishing three-fourths of his work (in II. 6.14). Further, some works on dharmaśāstra give very elaborate treatment of certain topics of which only faint traces are found in the ancient dharmasūtras and metrical smṛtis. Such topics are _vratas_ (which may be looked upon as extensions of the subject of gifts), _utsarga_ and _pratiṣṭhā_ (dedication of works of public utility and of temples and shrines), _tīrtha_ (sacred places and pilgrimages to them), _kāla_ (auspicious times, festivals &c.).

A glance at the above list will convince anyone how the conception of dharma was a far-reaching one, how it embraced the whole life of man. The writers on dharmaśāstra meant by _dharma_ not a creed or religion but a mode of life or a code of conduct, which regulated a man's work and activities as & member of society and as an individual and was intended to bring about the gradual development of a man and to enable him to reach what was deemed to be the goal of human existence.

From this standpoint various divisions of _dharma_ were suggested. Dharma was divided into _śrauta_ and _smārta_. The first comprised those rites and ceremonies with which the Vedic _Saṁhitās_ and Brāhmaṇas were chiefly concerned, such as consecration of the three sacred fires, the Full moon and New moon sacrifices, the solemn _soma_ rites &c. The _smārta_ comprised those topics that were specially dealt with by the smṛtis and that concerned the various classes and stages of life.[^1] The present work will concern itself principally with _smārta dharma_ and _śrauta dharma_ will be dealt with concisely in an appendix. Some works divide _dharma_ into _śrauta_ (Vedic), _smārta_ (based upon smrtis) and _siṣtācāra_ (the actions of the respected in society)[^2]. This classification is based on the three sources of _dharma_ viz., _śruti_, _smṛti_ and _śiṣṭācāra_, as observed by Baudhayana. Another and more comprehensive classifioation says that _dharma_ is sixfold, viz. dharma of Varnas (injunctions based on _varṇa_ alone such as 'a brāhmana should never drink wine' or 'a brāhmana should not be killed'), _āśramadharma_ (such rules as 'begging' and 'carrying a staff 'enjoined on a brahmacarī'), _varṇāśrama-dharma_ (rules of conduct enjoined on a man because he belongs to a partioular class and is in a particular stage of life, such as 'a brāhmaṇa _brahmacāri_ should carry & staff of _palāśa_ tree), _guṇadharma_ (such as protection of subjects in the case of a crowned king), _naimittika_ dharma (such as expiation on doing what is forbidden), _sādhārana dharma_ (what is common to all humanity viz., _ahiṁsā_ and other virtues).[^4] This classification appears to have been an ancient one. Medhātithi on Manu II.25 speaks of fivefold dharma (only omitting _sādhārana dharma_ from the abovementioned six) and quotes the explanations of them from the expounders of smṛtis. Hemādri (vrata-khaṇḍa p. 5) quotes 16 verses from the Bhaviṣyapurāṇa on the six-fold dharma.[^5] It will be noticed from the above that all matters (except _sādhārana_ or _sāmānya dharma_) have varṇā and āśrama as the pivots round which the whole of dharmaśāstra revolves. It is therefore that in ancient smṛtis like those of Manu (I. 2 and 107) and Yājñavalkya (I.1) the sages are represented as asking the great expounders of those codes to impart to them instruction in the dharmas of varṇās and āśramas. 

Before embarking upon any treatment of varṇas it would not be out of place to say a few words about dharmas common to all humanity. Our dharmaśāstra works do not enter into any subtle or detailed examination of the principles of ethics or of the moral standard, nor are the concepts of duty, happiness or perfection subjected to any searching analysis[^6]. But this does not at all mean that the principles of ethics were passed over by dharmaśāstra works or were not highly thought of by them. From very ancient times truth is exalted above everything else. Ṛgveda VII. 104.12 says[^7] 'True speech and false speech run a race against each other. Soma protects out of the two what is true and what is very straight-forward and strikes down what is false'. The conception of ṛta in the Ṛgveda is a sublime one and is the germ of the later doctrine of the rule of dharma. The Śatapatha-brāhmana (S. B. E. vol.44 p.85) enjoins 'therefore let a man speak naught but truth'[^8]. In the Taittirīyopaniṣad (I. II. 1), the teacher when taking leave of his pupil at the end of the latter's studenthood places truth in the forefront of his exhortation and dharma next.[^9] In the Chāndogya (III. 17) there is an allegory of a Soma sacrifice on life, where the dakṣiṇā (fee to be paid) is fivefold viz. the five virtues of tapas (asceticism), dāna (charity), ārjava (straightforwardness), ahiṁsā (non-injury to sentient beings), satyavacana (truthfulness). The Bṛ. Up. remarks that truth and dharma are in practical life identical terms.[^10] One of the noblest prayers in all literature oocurs in the Bṛ. Up. (I. 3.28) 'from falsehood lead me unto truth, from darkness lead me unto light, from death lead me unto immortality'. The Muṇḍakopaniṣad says 'only truth is victorious and not falsehood; the path of the gods is spread out by (the pursuit of) truth'. The Bṛ. Up. inculcates on all the great need of three cardinal virtues, viz. self-restraint, _dayā_ (compassion or love for all sentient life) and dāna (gifts or charity).[^11] The Chān. Up. says that the world of Brahman is free from all evil and only those who have lived as chaste students can enter the world of _brahma_. The Chān. Up. V. 10 sternly condemns five sins, viz, theft of gold, drinking spirits, murder of a brāhmana, defiling of one's guru's bed and association with these, as the greatest sins and in V, 11. 5 Aśvapati exultantly declares that in his kingdom there were no grave sinners. The Kaṭhopaniṣad (I. 2.23) insists[^12] upon cessation from evil conduct, peace of mind and concentration as essential for the seeker after the Self. The Udyogaparva 43.20ff. speaks of the twelve _vratas_ (vows or rules of conduct) for brāhmanas and Verses 22-25 desoribe at great length the characteristics of one who is dānta (self-controlled). Śānti 160 contains an eulogy of _dama_ (self-control). Śānti 162.7 describes how _satya_ has 13 aspects and verse 21 says that non-injury to all beings in thought, word and deed, good will and charity are the eternal dharma of the good. The Gautama-dharmasūtra (VIII. 24-26) holds that _dayā_ (compassion or love for all beings), _kṣānti_ (forebearance), _anasūyā_ (freedom from envy), _śauca_ (purity of body, speech and thought), _anāyāsa_ (absence of painful efforts or ambitions), _maṅgala_ (doing what is commended), _akārpaṇya_ (not demeaning oneself before others), _aspṛhā_ (not hankering after sensual pleasures or the possessions of others)[^14] are the qualities of the soul and remarks that the person who has these eight qualities realizes non-difference from Brahma and reaches the world of Brahma, though he may not have all the other forty _saṁskāras_, while he who has all the forty samskaras but is not possessed of these eight qualities does not reach the world of Brahma.[^15] Vasiṣṭha (X. 30) says that avoiding back-biting, jealousy, pride, egoism, unbelief, crookedness, self-praise, abuse of others, deceit, covetousness, delusion, anger and envy is the dharma of all āśramas and further (XXX. 1) he delivers a fine exhortation 'practise dharma (righteousness) and not adharma; speak the truth and not untruth; look far ahead, not near; look at what is highest, not at what is not highest'. Āpastamba Dh. S. (1. 8. 23. 3-6) calls upon all āśramas to eradicate faults that tend to destruction and to cultivate the opposite virtues (and gives long lists of both). This shows that in the scale of values mere performance of sacrifices and purificatory and other religious ceremonies ranked according to Gautama and other writers very low and the highest value attached to the moral qualities of the soul. There is no elaborate discussion of the questions as to why a man should tell the truth or abstain from hiṁsā (injury to sentient beings) and cultivate other high moral qualities. But it should not be supposed that no indications whatever are given of the reasons why this should be done. Two principles emerge if we closely examine the texts. In the midst of countless rules of outward conduct there is always insistence on the necessity to satisfy the inner man (antara-puruṣa) or conscience. Manu IV. 161 says'assiduously do that which will give satisfaction to the antarātman' (inner self); IV, 239 says 'No parents, nor wife nor sons will be a man's friends in the next world; but only righteousness'. 'Gods and the inner man mark the sinful acts' Vanaparva 207-54 and Manu VIII.85, 91-92. Vide also Ādi parva 74. 28-29, Manu VIII. 86, Anuśāsana 2. 73-74. The reason given for cultivating such virtues as _dayā_, _ahiṁsā_ is based upon the philosophical doctrine of the one Self being immanent in every individual as said in the words 'tat tvam-asi'. This is the highest point reached in Indian metaphysics and combines morality and metaphysics. That doctrine requires us to regard the goodness or badness of one's actions from the standpoint of other individuals who will be affected by such actions. Dakṣa (III. 22) declares[^16]'one who desires happiness should look upon another just as he looks upon himself. Happiness and misery affect one's self and others in the same way'. Devala says that the quintessence of dharma is that one should not do to others what would be disliked by one's self.[^17] Therefore our texts lay down two seats of authority in morals viz., the revealed truth (śruti) that 'All this is brahma' and the inner light of conscience. Another reason for cultivating high moral qualities is found in the doctrine of the goals or ends of human existence (_puruṣārtha_). From very ancient times they are said to be four, dharma (right conduct), artha (economic interests), kāma (satisfaction of sexual, emotional and artistic life), mokṣa (liberation of the spirit). The last is said to be the supreme end and to be attained only by the few and the vast majority can only place it as an ideal to be attained in the most distant future. As regards the other three, there is a gradation of values. Kāma is the lowest of all and only fools regard it as the only end.[^18] The Mahābhārata says: "A wise man tries to secure all three, but if all three oannot be attained, he secures dharma and artha or only dharma if he has a choice of only one from among the three. A man of middling discipline prefers artha to the other two; dharma is the source of both artha and kāma'. The dharmaśāstra writers did not condemn kāma altogether, they recognise that kāma has a place as a motive urging man to be active but they assigned it a low place. They recognised that a man shares with lower beings the impulses and emotions of sex, but that the satisfaction of these impulses is of lower values than the moral and spiritual ends proper for a developed human personality and therefore insist that it should be subordinated to _artha_ and _dharma_. Gautama (IX. 46-47) says 'one should not allow the morning, midday and evening to remain fruitless so far as dharma, artha and kāma are concerned. But among these three one should attach most importance to dharma'. Yāj. I. 115 says practioclly the same thing. Āp. Dh. S. (II. 8. 20. 22-23) declares that 'a man should enjoy all such pleasures as are not opposed to dharma. In this way one secures both worlds'.[^19] In the Bhagavadgītā (VII. 11) Kṛśṇa identifies himself with _kāma_ that is not opposed to dharma. Kautilya says[^20] 'one may enjoy _kāma_ provided there is no conflict with dharma and artha, one should not lead a life of no pleasures' and then true to his role of a writer on arthaśāstra, he proclaims that his own opinion is that _artha_ is the principal of the three, as _dharma_ and _kāma_ both spring from artha'. Manu (II. 224)[^21] after setting out several views about which of the three is principal states it as his own opinion that one should strive for all the three, but adds that if _artha_ or _kāma_ is in conflict with dharma one should give up artha or kāma as the case may be. Viṣṇu Dh. S. (71.84)and Bhagavata I.2.9 say the same. The Kamasūtra[^22] of Vātsyāyana defines the three and says that out of dharma, artha and kāma eacb preceding one is superior to each following one and that to the king artha should be the highest goal. This teaching shows that there are proximate ends or motives and ultimate ends or motives, that the ultimate ends are really the most valuable and that the whole teaching of dharmaśāstra points to this that all higher life demands discipline both of body and mind and requires the subjection of lower aims to aims of higher value. Manu II. 4 (like Aristotle in the first sentence of his Politics) says that the end of all activity is some presumed good. Manu further says (V.56) that the natural proclivity of all beings is to hanker after the satisfaction of the common and lower desires of hunger, thirst and sexual gratification and therefore no stress is to be placed on them but on the cessation or curbing of these. The Upaniṣads[^23] recognise the distinoticn between what is beneficial (_hita_) and what is most beneficial (_hitatama_). Śāntiparva (288.20 and 330.13) declares that what conduces to the greatest good of beings is 'satya'.

The Mitākṣara on Yāj. I. 1. remarks that _ahiṁsā_ and other qualities are the dharmas common to all including even cāṇḍālas. The qualities are variously enumerated and emphasis is laid upon different lists in different works. Śaṅkhasmṛti (I. 5) says that forbearance, truthfulness, self-restraint and purity are common to all varṇas. The Mahābhārata says that three are the best qualities among all beings viz., absence of enmity, truthfulness and freedom from anger[^24] and in another place says that the best _vrata_ (vow) for a man is threefold viz., he should feel no enmity (to others), should give and should speak the truth. Vasiṣṭha (IV. 4) says[^25] that truthfulness, freedom from anger, generosity, _ahiṁsā_ (non-injury) and procreation of offspring are the common dharma) of all (varṇas). Gautama (X. 52) says that even the Śūdra has to submit himself to the dharma of truthfulness, freedom from anger and purity (of body and mind). Manu says that _ahiṁsā_, truthfulness, no wrongful taking of another's possessions, purity and restraint of senses are in brief the common dharmas of all varṇas.[^26] Manu (IV. 175) calls upon all to take delight in truth, in dharma, in conduct worthy of an ārya and in purity. In the 3rd century B.C. the remarkable emperor Aśoka inscribed on stone in all parts of his empire the following list of virtues: compassion, liberality, truth, purity, gentleness, peace, joyousness, saintliness, self-control; which bear a close resemblance to Gautama's list and even to a later list of St. Paul (vide Pillar Edicts II and VII in E. I. vol. II p.249 and p.272). Yāj. (I. 122) mentions nine qualities as the means of securing dharma for all (from the brāhmaṇa to the cāṇḍāla[^27]). The Mahābhārata says that freedom from anger, truthfulness, sharing one's wealth with others, forbearance, procreation (of children) from one's wife (alone), purity, absence of enmity, straight-forwardness, maintaining persons dependent on one-self--these nine are the duties of all varṇas[^28]. The Vāmanapurāṇa says that tenfold dharma is common to all and names these ten as _ahiṁsā, satya. asteya, dāna_, forbearance, restraint, quiescence, not demeaning oneself, purity, tapas.[^29]Hemādri (vratakhaṇḍa pp. 7-8) quotes several passages froin the Brahma, Brahmavaivarta and Viṣṇudharmottara for several sādhāraṇa dharmas (virtues common to all varṇas and āśramas). The Viṣṇudbarmasūtra enumerates fourteen qualities as sāmānya-dharma.[^30]

The foregoing discussion establishes that all dharmaśāstra writers attached the highest importance to moral qualities and enjoined them upon all with all the emphasis they could command; but as their main purpose was a practical one, viz., to guide people to right acts in everyday life, they dealt more elaborately with the acts, rites and ceremonies that each person had to do with reference to his station in society. They are therefore found principally concerning themselves with varṇāśrama dharma and not with sādhāraṇa dharma (i. e. duties common to all alike). 

Aryāvarta -- One important question that is very much canvassed in works on dharmaśāstra is about the country or territory which should be called _āryāvarta_ or which was a fit habitation for those who called themselves the followers of the Vedic religion. Therefore a few words on this subject would be quite relevant. The Ṛgveda shows that the centre of Āryan culture in the times of the Ṛgveda was the land of the seven rivers, viz. North-west India and Punjab. We find that the rivers from Kubhā (the Kabul river, in Ṛg.V.53.9; x.76.6), Krumu (the modern Kurram, Ṛg.V.53.9, X.75.6), Suvāstu (modern Swat, in Ṛg.VIII.19.37), the seven Sindhus (Ṛg. II.12.12, IV.28.1, VIII.24.27, X.43.3) up to the Yamunā (Ṛg.V.52.17, X.75.5), the Ganges (Ṛg.VI.45.31, X.75.5) and Sarayu (probably in modern Oudh, in Ṛg.IV.30.18 and V.53.9) figure in the Ṛgveda. Among the rivers of the Punjab the following are individually mentioned : Sindhu (Ṛg.II, 15.6 'he made the Sindhu flow northwards', Ṛg.V.53.9, Ṛg.IV.30.12, Ṛg.VIII.20.25 where reference is made to the medicine in the Sindhu, in the Asiknī, in the seas and on mountains), Asiknī (Ṛg.VIII.20.25, X.75.5), Paruṣṇī (Ṛg.IV.22.2, V.52.9), Vipāś and Śutudri (Ṛg.III.33.1 where their confluence is spoken of), Vipāś alone in Ṛg.IV.30.12, Śutudri alone in Ṛg.X.75.5, Dṛṣadvatī, Āpayā and Sarasvatī (as very holy in Ṛg. III,23.4), Sarasvatī alone (Ṛg: VII.95, the whole hymn is addressed to it of which verso 2 says it springs from the mountains; Ṛg.VI.61 is another hymn addressed to it, v.10 of which says it has seven sisters), Gomatī (Ṛg.VIII.24.30, X.75,6), Vitastā (Ṛg.X.75.5). Gradually the Āryans spread southwards and eastwards. The Kāṭhaka S.X.6 speaks of Kuru-Pañcālas. In the Brāhmaṇas the centre of Āryan activities and culture shifted to the oountries of the Kurus and Pañcālas and Kosala-Videhas. For example, the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa remarks that in the lands of Kurupañcālas speech is at its best.[^31] In Śat.Br. XI.4.1.1 Uddālaka Āruṇi is called a Kuru-Pañcāla brāhmaṇa and contrasted with brāhmaṇas of the north (S.B.E. vol.44 p.51). Similarly the Kauṣītaki-br. (VII.6) remarks[^32] that those who want to learn (best) speech go northwards or wait upon him who comes from that direction. In the Śatapatha we have the story of Videgha Māṭhava who went beyond the country of Kosala-Videha, crossed the river Sadānīrā that came down from the Himālaya, and settled to the east of that river, where the country was a cultivated and civilized one in the times of that work, while in former ages it had been uncultivated (I.4.1.4-17, S.B.E. vol. 12 pp. 105-106). Even in the Buddhist Jātakas we see that being an 'udicca brāhmaṇo' was a source of great pride (vide Fick's work p.40). The Tai.Br. speaks of the _vedi_ of the gods as being in Kuru-kṣetra.[^33] Even in the Ṛgveda itself the country through which the rivers Dṛṣadvatī, Āpayā and Sarasvatī flowed is spoken of as the best spot (vide III.23.4). The Tai. Br. says that the Kurupañcālas go east in the winter and westwards in the last month of summer. In the times of the Upaniṣads also the Kurupañcāla country appears to have occupied a pre-eminent place. The Bṛ.Up. (III.1.1.) says that when Janaka, king of Videha, performed a sacrifice the brāhmaṇas of Kurupañcāla flocked there in large numbers. _Vide_ also Bṛ.Up.III.9.19. The Bṛ.Up.VI.2.1 and Chāndogya V.3.1 say that Śvetaketu went to the assembly of the Pañcālas. Kauṣītaki Br.Up. (IV.1.) names the countries of Uśīnara, Matsya, Kurupañcāla and Kāśivideha as centres of intellectual activity and in II.13 refers to two mountains one in the North and the other in the South (meaning probably Himavat and Vindhya). According to the Nirukta (II.2), the country of Kamboja was outside the limits of the country of Āryas, though the language spoken there seems to have been the same. The Mahābhāṣya lends support to this and adds that Surāṣṭra was not an Ārya country (vol.1, p.9). In the times of the Dharmasūtras great divergence of opinion prevailed on the question of the location of Āryāvarta. The Vasiṣṭha dharma[^34]-sūtra says: Āryāvarta is to the east of the disappea rance (of Sarasvatī in the desert), to the west of Kālakavana, to the north of the mountains Pāriyātra and Vindhya and to the south of the Himālaya'. It then refers to two more views held by other authors viz., 'Āryāvarta is in the region between the Ganges and the Jumna' and 'where the black antelope roams about there is spiritual pre-eminence'. The Baud.D.S. (I.1.27) gives the same limits of Aryāvarta as Vasiṣṭha, 


 substituting the word vinasana' for 'adarsa : 35 Patañjali in his Mahabhāṣya defines Aryavarta several times in the same terms as Vasiṣtha does. The Dharmasūtra of Saṅkha-Likhita gives somewhat similar limits by remarking 'spotless spiritual pre-eminence is to be found (in the country) to the east of the countries of Sindhu and Sauvira, to the west of the oity of Kampill, to the south of Himalaya and to the north of Pariyatra ', 37 The extant Manusmrti (II. 22) makes Aryāvarta coterminos with the whole of India north of the Vindhya by saying that the territory between the Himalaya and the Vindbya and extending up to the eastern and western oceans is known by the wise as Aryāvarta. The second view (viz. Āryāvarta is the region between the Ganges and the Jumna) oocurs in Beud. Dh. S. (I. 1.28). In the Tai. Ar. II.20 special honour is shown to those who dwell between the Ganga and the Yamuna. The third view (viz. Aryāvarta is the country where the blsok antelope roame about naturally) is the one given in most smptis. Both Vasistha (I. 14-15) and Baud. Dh. 8. (1. 1. 29-30) quote an ancient gātha from the Nidāna work of the Bhallavins *to the effect that wherever the black antelope roams about in the country lying between the Sindhu in the west and the rising mountain in the east, there is spiritual pre-eminence. So this view is a very anoient one and probably 

36. माग्विनशनात् प्रत्यक् कालकवना दक्षिणेन हिमवन्तमुवापारियात्रमेतवार्यावर्त arra irunt: \#TATUEI 91. 9. 1. 1.27. Eren 80 early as the 

a 7 1 Tipo we have the words FTAAT TEST ra (24,17.1). This shows that the Sarasvati had disappeared by the time of the app. According to tbe Vana parva 82. 111 Vinadana is the tirtha where the Sarasvati disappeared and Vanaparva (130. 3-5) says that the Sarasvatī disappeared at the entrance of Niṣadariptra through fear of pollution from Niṣadas und Salyaparva (37. 1-2) tells us that Vigasana is the sacred place where the Sarasvati disappeared through batred for sadrus and Abbirag. 

36. gatruperett i fra Y U TE foto TAKE TOT TUTI AETHIY vol. I. p. 475 (on Pan. II. 4.10), vol. III. p. 174 (op Pan. VI. 3.109) 

37. Sayalira area (t\#**: Turn To P rad 

I quoted in fir79 (TATIEG p. 57). 38. अधापि भालपिनो निदाने गावासबाहरन्ति । पश्चारिसन्धुर्विधारणी सूर्यस्योदयन ti remonfirarupat are worth Rai 8 I. 14-16. Vidrarupa reads for Toft and explains it as 'where the sun sets', while futrofi may mean dividing line, boundary', OTC17974*IST p. 57 reads fra veft and explains पितरणी जनकपर्वतसमीपे मालवदेशे परसरामेण धनुष्कोन्या कुई भित्ता निर्मि af UTI 

Oh. I) 

Limits of Aryavarta 

15 

aroge from some mythological aocount as is indioated by the commentary of Viśvarūpa on Yāj. I.2 which quotes & prose passage of the Svetāśvataras 'Sacrifice became a blaok antelope and wandered over the earth; dharma followed it in its wanderings'. This view of the limits of Aryavarta is maintained by Saṅkha (as quoted by Viśvarūpa on Yaj. I.2), Vigṇudharma. gūtra 84.4, Manu II. 23, Yaj. I. %, Samvarta 4, Lagbu-Harita (I. p. 178), Veda-Vyasa (1. 3), Bṛbat-Parāśara (p. 56) and several other smṛtis. The Manusmrti (II. 17-24) defines Brahmāvarta as the country between the holy rivers Sarasvati and Dṣṣad. vati, says that the traditional mode of conduct observed in that country is called sadācāra, that the countries of Kuruksetra, Matsya, Pañoala and Sarasene are styled Brahmarṣidesa and are slightly less (in holiness) than Brahmavarta, that Madhyadeśa is between the Himalaya and the Vindhya and to the east of Vinaśana and to the west of Prayāga, that Aryāvarta is the country between the Himalaya and Vindhya up to the eastern and western oceans, that that territory where the black antelope roams about naturally is the country fit for sacrifices and the countries beyond constitute mlecchadesa, that mon of the three higher varṇas should endeavour to 

live in these countries (viz. Brahmavarta, Brahmarṣideśa, Madhyadesa, Aryāvarta &c.) while & sūdra, when distressed for his livelihood, may stay in any country whatever. The Viṣṇudharmasūtra (84. 4) says that the country where the system of the four varpas is not established is to be known as Mlecche country and Aryāvarta is beyond that. This is ex plained by Apararka (p. 5) as follows: one who desires to practise Vedic religion should live in one of the four countries viz. Brahmāvarta and others; if that is not possible, then in a country where there is establishment of the four varṇas and the blaok antelope roams about naturally; if both these cannot be had, then one should dwell in a country where at least one of the two (cāturvarnya and black antelope) is found. The above discussion shows that in very ancient times the country south of the Vindhya was looked upon as beyond the pale of Aryan culture. Baud. Dh. 8. (I. 1. 31) says that the countries of Avanti, Anga, Magadha, Surāsýra, Dakṣiṇāpatha, Upāvit, Sindhu 

39. Vide Tandya Br. 26. 10. 13-14 for Dṣṣadvati falling into the Sarasvati and 25. 10. 16 for the disappearanoe of the lattor and Ait. Br. (chap. 38 kh.) for Kuru-Panoola, Vasa and Usinara as included in the centre of India..16 



t Oh. I 

and Sauvira are of mixed origin (i. e. not of pure Aryan ancestry), that a person who goes to Arattaka, Karaskara, Pundra, Sauvira, Anga, Vanga, Kalinga and Pr&nūna (9) has to offer a solemn sacrifice like the Sarvaprstha and that for going to Kalinga the prayasoitta is an offering to. Vaibvānara Agni. The Mit, on Yāj. III. 292 quotes a verge of Devala to the effect: that if a man goes to Sindhu, Sauvira, Saurastra, the border lands (or Mleccha countries), Anga, Vanga, Kalinga and Andhra he has to perform the Upanayang sadskāra over again." The Mit. adds a remark that this is so only if the man goos to these countries for some purpose other than pilgrimage. Gradually however as Aryan culture spread over the whole of what is now called India the view of the sages about the countries pre-eminently Aryan had to be given up. Medhātithi on Manu II. 2% explains that Aryāvarta is so called 'because Aryas again and again spring up there and because the Mlecchas even if they overrun it from time to time do not abide there for long' and then makes the following very sensible observation (on II, 23) 'if a ksatriya king of excellent conduct were to conquer the Mlecohas, establish the system of four Varnas (in the Mlecoha country) and assign to Mlecohas a position similar to that of candālas in Aryāvarta, even that (Mleccha) country would be fit for the performance of saori. fices, since the earth is not by itself impure, but becomes impure through contact (of impure persons or things).'* As a result of the spread of Aryan culture eastwards and southwards and the frequent invasions of non-Aryan tribes on the north west, the countries on the rivers of the Punjab came to be looked upon in the whirligig of time as unworthy of the Aryas to live in. Karnaparva 43. 5-8 abuses those who live on the Sindhu and the five rivers of the Punjab as Impure and dharmabahya." 

40. MARIETATUT tron : 1 pour former Tat T HET I. This is Devala v. 16 with slight variations in the 3rd pada. It is asoribed to Baudhayana in the Smrtioandrika I. p. 9. 

41. आर्या वर्तन्ते तत्र पुनः पुनरजवन्याक्रन्याकम्पापि मचिरं तत्र म्लेच्छा स्थातारो Hai Aur on HE II. 22, Fischfanfarrett TOT NYTNUT F T पराजयेत चातुर्वण्य पासयेत् , म्लेच्छाचार्यावर्त इव चाण्डालान् ज्यवस्थापयेत् सोपि fu , wat A FAN GET I FTOHTI AYT, on y II. 23. 

42. qurat 

f ra mint a 

S WOT: 1 a Warage TV To FTTT tun uran 43.7; gobe 44. 31-34 calls these countries Arattas and * naftadharma'. Vide u mot TEPÖET TE Fatura TETET I SICUT TH TETAT मतेच्यायों इचहं वसेत् ॥ कारस्करान्माहिषकान् कालिकान्केरलास्तथा। कोतकान्बीरकाध Fat forstaan teef 44. 40 and 43. 

Ch. 11 

Bharatavarga 

Another word whiob is very often used, particularly in the Puranas, to denote the territory where the ancient Vedic reli glon prevails is Bharatavarṣa or Bhāratavarṣa. It occurs in the Hathigumpha Insoription of Khāravela (2nd century B.C.) as Bharadhavasa.48 The Mārkandeyapurāṇa says that Bharatavarṣa has the ocean on the east, south and west and the Himalaya on the north.t The Viṣṇupurana (II. 3.1) says the same and Matsya (114.10) and Vayu define Bharatavarsa as stretching from Cape Comorin to the source of the Ganges.ts Sabara (not later than 5th century A. D.) in his bhāsya on Jaimini (X. 1.35 and 42) shows that to him there was unity of language and culture from the Himālaya to Cape Comorin. 46 Paithinasi as quoted in the Paribhasa-prakasa (p.58) says that dharma is fully developed (lit. four-legged) in the country from the Himalaya to Cape Comorin. According to Markandeya (53.41), Vayu (vol. I chap. 33.52) and other Purāṇas Bharatavarṣa is so called after Bharata, son of Rsabha, descendant of Svayambhuva Manu%3; while Vāyu (vol. II, chap. 37.130) appears to strike a different note by saying that Bharatavarṣa is so called after Bharata, the son of Duṣyanta and Sakuntala. The Viṣṇupurāṇa saya that after thousands of births a person secures life as & human being in Bharatavarṣa and this land is called Karmabhūmi (the land of religious actions) for those who want to secure heaven and final liberation. The Vāyupurāṇa says almost the same and adds that in no land other than Bharatavarṣa is karma prescribed for mortals. It is somewhat amusing to find that 

43. Vide E. I, vol. 20 p. 79. 

44. दक्षिणापरतो घंस्य पूर्वेण च महोदधिः । हिमवानुत्तरेणास्य कार्मुकस्य यथा एणः ॥ तदेतद्धारत वर्ष । मार्कण्डेय 57.59. 

__45. उसरं यत्समवस्य हिमाद्रेश्चैव दक्षिणम् । वर्षे तमारत नाम भारती यत्र संततिः। विष्णुपुराण II. 3. 1; वायु vol. I, 45. 75-76 उत्तरं यत्समुदस्य हिमवहक्षिणं च यत् । वर्ष यजारतं नाम यत्रेयं भारती प्रजा। मत्स्य 114. 10 आयतस्तु कुमारीतो गङ्गायाः प्रवधावधिः (प्रभषावधिः); compare with the last घायुपुराण vol. 1, 45.81 'आयतो मा कुमारिक्पादागहाप्रभवाच्च वै ।।. 

48. प्रसिद्धश्च स्थाल्यो चकशब्द आ हिमवत आ च कुमारीभ्यः! on मिमि x. 1. 36 and 'ओदने हि चकशब्दः प्रसिद्ध आ हिमवत आ च कुमारीभ्यः' on जैमिनि x. 1.42. 

47. पैठानासः । आ हिमवत आच कुमार्या सिन्धुर्वतरणी नदी सूर्यस्योदय पुरस या पहा कृष्णगो विचरति नत्र धर्मश्चतुष्पादो भवतीति । परिभाषाभकाश P. 58. ___48. कर्मभूमिरियं स्वर्गमपधगै च गछताम् । विष्णुपुराण II. 3.2; vide Wilson's Vispupurana rol. II. pp. 106-106; ततः स्वर्गश्च मोक्षध मायश्चान्तश्च गम्यतेन खल्दन्यत्र माना भूमौ कर्म विधीयते ॥ वायु 46.77; विष्णुपुराण II. 3. 6. 

H.D.S 

18 



[ Oh. I 

many of the countries of India that in modern times pride them gelves on being most orthodox are declared by the Aditya-purana (as quoted in the Smsticandrika) to be countries unfit for habitation and to be suoh that a stay in them except for pilgrim age entailed loss of caste and prāyssoittag. 49 The Adipurāṇa (Adityapurāṇa ?) as quoted in the Paribhāṣāprakāśa (p. 59) says ' no one, whether a dvija or not, born in Aryāvarta should cross the three rivers, Sindhu, Karmadā (i. e. Karmanisa) or Karatoy: except on a pilgrimage' and that if he does so, he should perform the penance of cāndrāyana. 

All smrti writers and commentators generally restrict theniselves to the duties of varṇas and āśramas as practised in Aryavarta or Bharata varsa, though in very rare cases (as in Yaj. II. 192) they provide for the observance of the usages of even heretics. 

49. काशीकाश्यपसौराद्रदेवराष्ट्रान्धमत्स्यजा। कावेरी कोणाहणास्ते देशा निन्दिता *** Ful... (samo verse as in D. 42)... T ragarettura ETA TITUTE I rear THOT GAF Afisata Thes : 

ll a re I. p. 9 quoting भादित्यपुराण, आविपुराणे-आर्यावर्तसमुत्पनो हिजो या पदि पाहिजार कर्मदा सिन्धुपारच करतोयो म लन्येत् । आर्यावर्तमतिक्रम्य विना तीर्थक्रिया विजः। भाज्ञा देव तथा पित्रोरेन्दवेन forata * OTTTTTTTET B. 69. 

--------------------------------------------------

1. दारामिहोत्रसम्बन्धमिज्या भोवस्य लक्षणम् । स्मातों वर्णाश्रमाचारो पमैश्च for gar n Fagror 144. 30-31, og tro 59, 31-32 and 39,'spreaparata पूर्वकोऽधीतमत्यक्षवेदमूलो वर्शपूर्णमासादिःभोवः । अनिवपरोक्षशाखामूला शोचाचमनादिः FAROE IH 967. AT. I. part 1 p. 64. 

2. पेदोका परमो धर्मः स्मविशागतोऽपरः शिष्टाचर्णिः परा मोक्कायो धर्माः सनातन MATTHUW 141. 65; raya 207. 83 ..... Wanita ITT: PIETATE ferat 

f r 

; vide mar 354. 6 also. 8. Taal wat aan I... Farat adaladin POTETTARIO. 2..1.1.1-4. 

तिद्यथा-पचयन्ति 

4. T oni WHET Garut I: 9999 AUTO OD HE II. 25; 99 धर्मशग्दः षविधस्मार्तधर्मविषयः । वद्यथा-वर्णधर्म आश्रमधो वर्णाश्रमधर्मो गुणधर्मो निमित्त. Who Arancoporat i FATTTT on T, I. 1. 

6. Kulluka on Manu II. 25 and the Kṛtyaratnakara pp. 9–10 do the same. It is to be noted that some of these very verses are quoted as from Sumantu by the Smṛtioandrika. (I p. 6). 

6. Referonce inay be made to the Ethics of India' by Prof. Hopkins (1924) and 'Hindu Ethios' by Dr. Jobo McKenzie in * Boligious quest of India' series. The former work is marked by a dotached and fair attitude towards the ideas of the ancient Indiana and thoir writings. The latter, I am sorry to say, is marrod by the ansympathetic and suporoilious attitude of a Christian missionary. Its koy-note is porverao inasmuch as tho foundation of the author's oritioiom is the notion that ono is not roally moral anless one in engaged in notivo social sorvios. There ia vory little warrant for 

(Conti mund on net page) 

d in notivo social bat ono is not really dution of the au 
(Continued from last page) this hypothosis in well-knowny works on Ethics. To expose the fallacies in Principal MoKenzie's work would requiro a volume. But a fow words must be said here. What particular brand of active social servioo the learnod author has in viow is difficult to follow. I would like to make bim a present of the following lines from the Encyclo pædia Britannica on Social Service The term social service is a comparatively now ono in Great Britain. If it bad been used previous to the 20th century it would bave meant philanthropy and charity in the ordinary senso". If the learned author means that ancient India never insisted on universal philantbropy and charity, he has read the Indian Literature in vain. Every house-holder was called upon by the Hindu Śāstras to offer food according to his ability to studente, ascetics and to all beings including the untoucbable candalas and even dogs and crows. Every brāhmana who could teach had to do 80 without demanding any foo beforehand. Maths were establisbed in all parts of India for oxpounding religious books, feeding students and the poor. Thero aro annaðatras even now where hundreds are fed every day. No necessity arose throughout the ages for a Poor Law in India with its attendant evils well portrayed in Dickens' famous master-piece Oliver Twist'. The above were some of the different aspects of philanthropy and charity which are now dubbed social service. In the third century B. C. Asoka had established bospitals not only for men but evon for beasts and Yaj. 1.209 equates the free qursing of sick persons with gifts of cows. The learned Professor asks with an air of triumph and condemnation of all Indian morality (p. 251) "Is there anything oomparable to the movement which 8t. Francis of Assisi initiated and lod?' The learned Professor has fallen into the frequent error of comparing & move mont of the 18th contury.with Indian ideas over 2000 years old. Again I shall quote words from the Encyolopædia Britannica. "It would bo an anachronism to think of Francis as a philanthropist or social worker or & rovivalist preacher, though ho fulfilled the functions of all these. Before every thing he was a ascetic and mystic'. The partioular brands of Social Service that are now in vogue are mainly due to the ravages of Imperialiam and extreme capitalistic tondenoios. Besides ho forgots that ayon tbe movement started by St. Francis bad schisms and was guilty of all the moral evils that are associated with Western monastio institutions. Vido the recent and lucid book of Sir Śivaswamy Aiyor on Evolution of Hindu moral ideals' (1936, Oaloutta University). 

1. सविज्ञान विकिरणे जमाव समासपचसी पसमाते । तयोर्यसत्य पतरजी mfattiana RTT. VII, 104. 12. 
8. Compare TOM. I. 1. 1. 1. Art Tut verans and 1. 1. 1. 5. Freyda ! 

9. t rarerfisraan at TAURTITEET I FITOT I TIH. 5. I. 11. 1. 10. तस्मात्सत्पं पदन्तमाहुर्धर्म बदतीति धर्म पा पदन्त सत्यं वदतीत्येतस्येवैतदुभय ai T. 3. I. 4. 14., maana tu hal FAT HARI AT FIATAT TAYS The TATT I ET. 7. 1. 3. 28. 

11. Troaa star ** * AFITE. 7. V. 2. 3. 

12. erat una RTU AHATEMI I PIATTHIA AMATORE mra \# OT4. I. 2. 23 ; vide also I. 3.7 and Heft 89. III. 5 for a list of qualities of darkness which the student of a bigh and sublime philosopby has to avoid
imilarly buena&dri (Viata per les defining.-10 for the (1. p. 13 Behaspatioig. Vide Matsya or saying that_32 for & slider 

___13. अद्रोहा सर्वभूतेषु कर्मणा मनसा गिरा । अनुग्रहश्च दानं च सतां धर्म सनातनः॥ 77/arge 162, 21. 

14. urETTATOTT ITT ANTIHEET STIPATHI Horf YHTE I 11. 0. [. VIII. 23-24. Haradatta quotes eigbt verses which explain these eight qualities. Atri (verses 34-41) also defines those eight similarly but in different worde. A parārka (pp. 164-165), Susticandrika (1. p. 13), Hem&dri (Vrata p. 8) and Parnsaramadhaviya I. part 1 p. 84 quoto from Bphaspati eight veraes defining these eight qualities, which olosely resemble Atri's. Vide Matsya 52.8-10 for these sight qualities and Vāyu 59.40-49, Markandeya 61.66 for saying that day& (love for being&) is at the top of the eight atmagupas and 28.31-32 for & slightly different opumeration of the eight. Vippupurana (III. 8.35-37) days that these eight mentioned by Gautama (fafaer being substituted tor शान्ति) and three more namely भाभिमानिता, सत्य, and पियवादिता sxe common to all varpas. Vide सिष्ठ VI. 3 भाचारहीनं न पुनन्ति वेदा. 

16. Smflioandrika (1. P. 13) quotou verner of Saikhs to the bamo offects 

___16. पथैवात्मा पास्तवष्टग्या मुखमिच्छता । सुखदुःखानि तुल्यानि यथारमान तथा 

\# III. 22. 

17. seat bare er rartarki ma: Ara 7 FAI चरेत् ॥ देवल quotod in कृत्यरत्नाकर p. 17. Compare आपस्तम्बस्मृति x. 12 STREAgart : qu 

, ir 113. 8–9 7 9274 VITEL प्रतिकलं यदारमनः । एष संक्षेपतो धर्मः कामादन्यः प्रवर्तते । प्रत्याख्याने च दाने च सुख Te RT I STORICHTH SET: FATTARTUFI, TIPA 260. 20 and 25 wapo विहित मेच्छेदात्मनः कर्म पूरुषः । न तत्परषु कुर्वीत जानमामियनात्मनः । स भियाग्युपगवं धर्म माहर्मनीषिणः। 

18. त्रिवर्गयुक्तः प्राज्ञानामारम्भो भरतर्षभ । धर्मार्थावरुध्यन्ते त्रिवर्गासंभषे नरा. पृथक्त्वविनिषिष्टानां धर्म धीरोदुरूयते । मध्यमोथै कलिं पाला काममेवानुरुध्यो ...कामार्थों लिप्समानस्तु धर्ममेवादितश्चरेत् । नहि धर्मादपैत्यर्थः कामो वापि कदाचन । उपायं धर्म AT free forstiga i gumi 124, 34-38; vide TimTTO 167.8-9 for the statement that dharma is the best, artha is middling and kāma is the lowest and that a man sbould so act that dharma would be the principal goal of his life and that he should so deal with others as he would deal with himself Pronurut rare ATI HUT Perange afavara T RA 1.' The Ta winds up with the words fogfitioner wona ART I Falcosa FT* \#f**o \#regat \# Faaris 5.62; vido algo 

FT4 60.22, stor 161,37, 
___19. भोक्ता च धर्माविषबान भोगान् । एवमुभी लोकापनिजपति । आप. ध. II.8.20. 22-23. 

20. अर्थशाच I. 7 'धर्मार्थाविरोधेन काम सेवेतन निमुखः स्यात् । ......... अर्थ एष प्रधान इति कौटिल्यः । अर्थमूलौ हि धर्मकामाविति। 

21. धर्मा पुज्यते श्रेयः कामार्थों धर्म एव च । अर्थ एवंह चा श्रेषत्रिवर्ग इतित स्थितिम II. 224; परित्यजेवकामौ यो स्यार्ता धर्मवर्जितौ। मनु IV. 176; com Pare विष्णुधर्मसूत्र 71.84 'धर्मविरुद्धौ चार्थकामौ (परिहरेत्)।'; अनुशासन 111.18-19 'धर्मधार्थच कामश्च त्रितयं जीविते फलम् । एतमयमवाप्तव्यमधर्मपरिवर्जितम् । विष्णुपुराण III. 11. 7 परित्यजेदर्थकामी धर्मपीगकरो आप। धर्ममयमुखोद लोकपिविष्टमेव च। 

22. अलौकिकत्वावार्थत्वात् अमवृत्तानां पज्ञादीमा शानात्मवर्तन लौकिकत्वाद्र वार्थत्वाच प्रवृतेभ्यश्च मांसभक्षणादियः शानादेव निवारणं धर्मः ।...विधाभूमिहिरण्यपा धाग्यभाण्डोपस्कर-मित्रादीनामर्जनमर्जितस्य विवर्धनमः । ...श्रोत्रत्वकचक्षुजिनामाणानामा स्मसंयुक्तेन मनसाधिष्ठिताना स्पेषु षेषु विषयेष्वाइकल्यतः प्रकृत्तिः कामः । सेवा समपाये पूर्ण पूणेगरीपान । अर्थश्च राशा। कामसूत्र I. 2.7-16. 

. 23. स्वमेव पूणीय यं वं महण्याय हिततमं मन्यस इति । कौषीतकि प्रा.उ. III. 1. 

H.D. 
24. एतदित्रितयं श्रेष्ठं सर्वभूतेषु भारत । निरता महाराज सत्यमक्रोध एव च। आश्रमवासिपर्ष 28.9; त्रीण्येव तु पदान्याहुः पुरुषस्योत्तम व्रतम् । न चैव दद्याच्च सत्य * Till BOTH 120.10. 

25. FUT \#TypittaafTT 479 en FTT IV. 4; vido & X. 30 for 13 qualities prescribed for all sdramas. 

26. हिंसा सत्पमस्तेयं शौचमिन्द्रियनिग्रहः । एतं सामासिक धर्म चातुर्वण्ड sta: \# AU X. 63; vide av VI. 62 for too guṇas proscribed for all āśramas. 

27. NICHT......THUM: 1 FH Harfi yra mitet war 97. I. 12% ; vide . III. 66. 

28. 3*14: \#49** HOT: NHI TUTI *: Fag arig si TASTE I urah YuiTotata prepotent: ṣifa. 60. 7-8. 

29. अहिंसा सत्यमस्तेयं दानं क्षान्तिर्दमः शमः । अकार्पण्यं च शौचं च तपश्च troftri TTTF CTF ? Frotaork: \# Angrror 14. 1-2; muguras 114, 16-18 proscribes the following as common to all vargas and aśramas. 'या समस्तभूतेषु तितिक्षा नाभिमानिता । सत्यं शौचमनायासो मालं प्रियवादिता । मैत्री 

वास्पदा तद्वदकार्पण्यं द्विजोत्तमाः । अनसूया च सामान्या वर्णाना कधिता गुणाः ॥ SWATOTO Fra FrapUTT'. 

| 30. I rea: Mits Tagge: 1 mat nat tarta tới 4 आजे लोभशून्यत्वं देववाहाणपूजनम् । अनन्यस्या च तथा धर्मः सामान्य उच्यते ॥ विष्णु HELT II, 16–17; compare pr. \#. \#. I. 8. 23.6 for a long list of qualities progoribed for all āśramas and time 297. 24-25 for 13 \#Tutorets 'आपस्थिमहिंसाच प्रमादः (प्रसा!) संविभागिता। भाबकर्मातिधेयं च सत्पमकोध एवं 

U FIT ang hantar ata fara ETAT I STORE PATHET AL FNAC TAI 

31. MIETITE raagu Image IT. III. 2. 3. 15. Vide 8, B. E. vol. 12 p. XLII n. 1 and vol. 26 p. 50 for various interpretations. ___32. तस्मादीच्या विशि मज्ञातसरा पारापत उ उ पप यन्ति पा शिक्षित पो 

ITT Mwa 14 u grupamera T. VII. 6, 

33, ar parHET ...... data areita 18. m. V. 1. 1; i per पधे पर आ पृथिव्या इळायास्पदे सदिनत्वे अहाम्। वृषस्यां मानुष आपयायां सरस्वत्या रेवदमे f \# \#. III. 23. 4; for Kuruksetra as a very ancient place vide Bata paths IV. 1.6, 13 and Ait. Br. (cbap. 36. kb. 4); TATTETTES profera un gruoT: Argi I..... T yp Hard RTH STAT PATI . . I. 8.5. 

34. आपावत: मागादर्शात्मत्यह कालकरमादक्पारियात्राबक्षिणेन हिमवतः । उत्सरेण fortuna 1 ... Terence ! Et pourront forfer W AH per Ifan I. 8-9 and 18-13. 