+++
title = "028 स्वाध्यायेन व्रतैर्"

+++

This body is made godly,—by a thorough study of the three Vedas, by Observances, by libations, by offerings, by children, by the Great Sacrifices and by the Sacrifices. (28)


“Nowhere in the Veda is the attaining of Brahman declared to be the reward of the actions here enumerated. For instance, (A) as for the compulsory acts, they are prescribed as being without rewards. If we.were to assume rewards, such an assumption would be purely human in its source (and as such not authoritative). And since the Veda has declared them to be compulsory by means of such phrases ‘throughout one’s life’ and the like, there can be no justification for applying the principle.of the V sacrifice (and assume the reward to consist in the attaining of heaven). If it were argued that—‘from the present verse of Manu itself we learn that the said Acts bring the mentioned rewards,’—then it would come to this that only such persons are entitled to these acts as long for Final Release; which would deprive them of their compulsory character; and this would be contrary to what has been declared in the Veda. It may be argued that—‘inasmuch as no one ever undertakes a fruitless act, (if no rewards were mentioned) the laying down of the acts would be futile.’ ‘But there may be no performance at all; that does not matter; the use of a ‘source of knowledge’ lies in making things known; if it has succeeded in doing this, its purpose has been served; and the present verse does clearly indicate some acts as to be done; and if this indication is accomplished (the purpose of the scriptural injunction has been served); if people do not perform those acts, they transgress the behests of the scripture, and thereby incur sin. All old writers have explained the sense of the Injunctive etc., on these lines. If a servant does not perform his duty, as he is ordered to doby his master, cither he does not obtain his wages, or he incurs sin. Now as regards the compulsory acts, since no rewards are mentioned (in the form of wages), the evil that follows is not in the form of losing the reward, but in the form of suffering pain. It is only in this manner that we can explain the fact of, all men being required to perform the compulsory acts. From all this it follows that in the case of compulsory acts there is no reward. (B) As regards the optional acts, other results have boen declared as following from them, and not Fin l Release (the one mentioned here). How then could this Final Release be such an end of man as is accomplished by the mere performance of acts?”


“How is it then that Gautama (8. 8) has spoken of ‘forty sacraments’? There the Soma-sacrifice also has been mentioned as a sacrament; and certainly a primary sacrifice (as the Soma-sacrifice undoubtedly is) can never have the character of a mere consecratory sacrament. Nor is it possible to take this part of Gautama’s Sutra as an arthavāda; as all the forty sacraments are spoken of as being on the same footing.”