+++
title = "02 Seven Aṅgas of Rājya"

+++

CHAPTER II. 

SEVEN ANGAS OF RAJYA 

According to almost all of our authorities a state (rūjya) is constituted by seven elements 20 viz. svāmin (ruler or sovereign), amūtya (minister), janapada or rāṣtra (the territory of the State and its people), durga ( fortified city or capital), kośa ( accumula ted wealth in the ruler's treasury), dandu (army), mitra (friends or allies). These seven are called angas or praktis. The word praksti in works on politics is also used for the constituents of a circle of states (of a mandala). Vide Manu VII. 156 and Kau tilya (VI.2). The word also means ministers as in Sukranitisāra II. 70-73 and 'subjects' in Khāravela's Inscription (E. I. vol. 20 p.79 1. 4), Nārada (prakīrṇaka 5), Raghuvamsa VIII. 18. The order in which these are arranged and their names vary a good deal. The quotations given below will indicate how the order differs. The sequence is important for the reason that some of our authorities expressly state that when calamities be fall or deterioration sets in each of the seven elements, those that befall each preceding one are more serious for the State than those of each succeeding one ( Kautilya VIII. 1, Manu IX. 295). For janapada sometimes the word jana or rāṣtra is used, for * danda' the word 'bala' and the word 'pura' for 'durga'. The Aśramavāsiparva (5.8) speaks of eight angas of rājya. Accord ing to Sumantu quoted by the Sarasvativilāsa (p. 46 ) danda means “punishment bodily or monetary” and' army is included under ‘kośa'. Sumantu says that th esvūmin has to be preserved by himself, the ministers by showing them proper respect, the people by keeping them contented, the fortified capital by abun dance of wealth and grain, the kośa by proper expenditure, danda 

20. FYIFYHTETETT ngasulat &\#9: . VI. 1, p. 257; MirewraT जमो दुर्ग कोशो वस्तथैव च। मित्राण्येता प्रकसयो राज्यं समासुध्यते ॥ पाज्ञ. I. 3533; स्वाम्पमारपी पुरं राई कोशवण्डौ महत्तथा । सप्त प्रकृतयो मेताः समा राज्यमुज्यते । \#1 IX. 294; UTEYHregainauzergren 4: fage III33; FITTATUOTT naar 7: I TEREH quoted in FerreIf p.45. Vide also gift 69. 64-65, \#225. 11 and 239, 251 ST 233. 12, FAX I. 16 and IV. 1-. The application of the word for to these is lucidly explained by Apararka (P. 588 ) 447 TERORISTIT a forgata wa \#Thai que propose F irm Fo rmat, Traw at Frente hou 

बतो. भवन्ति स्वाम्पादपोरापाशानि। 

18 



(Vol. by following one's dharma, friends by truthfulness. The autho rities are agreed that the ruler is the most important or the first of the seven. Kautilya puts the matter very forcibly and realis. tically when he states that the briefest exposition of the elements of rājya is to say that the king is the State S). This is really not the same doctrine as that emphasized by Louis XIV of France when he said ' L'Etat c'est moi'. Kautilya makes his position clear (in VIII, 1) by saying that it is the king who appoints ministers and servants and superintendents, who takes measures of relief against calamities befalling the other prakstis and measures of prosperity, that it is he who appoints other ministers when those already appointed are under calamities, that if the ruler is pros perous he transmits prosperity to his prakstis, that the prakstis bear that character which the king has and that hence the ruler occupies the position of a permanent, never-exhausted centre of power. The Sukranitisāra II4 remarks that if the king begins to act at his sweet will, it leads to calamities, to loss of ministers and of the kingdom. The Sukranitisāra (I. 61-62) compares the seven angās of rājya to the organs of the body viz., the king is the head, the ministers are the eyes, ally the ear, treasury the mouth, the army the mind, capital and rāṣtra are hands and feet. It is emphasized by Kām. (IV.1-2) that each of the seven elements is complementary to the others, that if the state is defective even in one out of the seven elements it does not pull well. thel Sāntiparva it is stated that it is not possible to say categorically that any one of the seven excels the others in merit, but that at different times a different element assumes importance over others, since that particular element is in the particular circumstances capable of accomplishing the purpose in hand. This shows that Manu and the Mahābhārata held that there was an organic unity in the several elements of rājya. All must work harmoniously towards one ideal or end. Manu (IX. 296–297) says this by means of a simile 'Just as among the three staves tied together (by a rope of cow's hair) used by a sannyāsin no particular staff is superior (to the others ), so among 

D 

21. Tar 179fara rasite: I T VIII. 2; puritate fare Hifati Ft. VIII. 1; 

F a rruan auf 99: H: 1 STATET: O da interes A El hat are youret (!)ganta I. 61-62; A TAT 778448 

at maaari rias. . 123; \#\#FFFURET (7804 freder fra: 1 भापोन्पवणकरप का केनगुणतोऽधिकः ॥ तेषु हि कालेजु सचदा विशिष्यते । येन यत् fara TV1*974 999 \# Animagi ay. IX. 206-297 contain almost there very words and ideas. Any 239. 1 has greutatea a avaa 

III ) 

Seven angas of rājya 

19 

the seven elements of the state no particular one can be said to excel the others, since each of them has a particular excellence of its own; a particular element is pre-eminent in some particular matter and therefore the superiority of one to the others when expressed (as e. g. in Manu IX. 295 ) is to be confinod to that matter alone.' Manu here emphasizes the harmonious working or unity of the seven elements though they are diverse in their individual characters. The analysis of the elements and nature of the State led ancient Indian writers to hold that a mere conglomeration of people did not by itself constitute a State, but that for a State there must be people who live within certain definite geographical limits (rāstra ), they must be bound by the bond to render allegiance to a ruler ( svāmi), have a certain system of government (amātya), inust have a regulated economic system, a force for defence and international relationships. That is, the most essential elements of a state are (1) a sovereign, (2) a system of govern ment, (3) a definite territory and (4) & population of some size. These four were known even to the most ancient sūtras. Vide Gaut. XI. 1 (rāja), Ap. II. 6. 25. 10 (amātya), Ap. II. 10. 25. 11, 

II, 10, 26. 4 (visaya, nagara, grāma), Gaut XI. 5-8 (prajā). 

These seven elements will now be dealt with one after another. 

It should be noted that neither Kautilya nor Kamandaka defines rājya. Etymologically it means the 'karma' or 'bhāva' ( activity or state of a king )', being derived from 'rājan' with the affix 'ya'(syan or' yak', acc. to Pāṇini V. 1. 124 and 128 ). This is the etymological meaning. But rājya ' is employed in the sense of 'kingdom' in popular parlance and also in the smrtis and works on polity as in Manu VII. 111, Kim, XIII. 81-82, But when it is said that rājya 'has seven elements then ' rājya 'has a very wide meaning and stands for the king, the ministers, the country and its people and the economic and military resources and in such a case it is proper to translate the word as 'the State'(as including both the Government and the governed). In some cases rājya' should be rendered as * government, which includes only the king and his ministers and conveys also in modern times the agency or machinery through which the will of the State is formulated, realized or carried out; vide Mānasollāsa II. 8, verses 688,689, 691 The Nitivākyāmsta (p: 43 ) says " rājya means the activity of the ruler that would be appropriate to protecting the earth". 

20 



[Vol. 

Medhātithi on Manu VIII. 1 remarks that rājya means 'a prosperous people'. In XIII. 4 Kautilya states (na hyajano janapado rājyam janapadam vī bhavatili Kautilyah) it as his opinion that a territory without any inhabitants cannot become a rājya (a kingdom ) or a janapada (as one of the seven elemento). Sabara on Jai. II. 3. 3 has a discourse on the deri vation of rājya. 

Prof. Bhandarkar in 'Some Aspects of Ancient Indian Polity' (pp. 66-89), Jayaswal in Hindu Polity' part II p. 9, Prof. B. K. Sarkar in ‘Positive Background of Hindu Sociology' Book II pp. 34-39 and others maintain that this ancient analysis of rājya into seven elements shows that the idea of the State as an organism, that is, the organic theory of the State was known to Hindu thinkers and that this doctrine of saptanga rājya 1a satisfies the definition of the State given by Bluntschli and others. On the other hand Mr. Anjaria in chapter IV of his 'Nature and grounds of political obligation in the Hindu state' after pointing out how there are different versions of the organic theory of the state denies vehemently that the Hindu theory can be called a proper organic theory of the State, particularly because the Hindu thinkers did not regard the State as a moral organism, because they attached a permanent stigma of inferiority to large sections of the community on the bare ground of birth and that the Hindu conceptions did not harmonize the authority of the State and the liberty of the individual. It would be far beyond the scope of the present work to enter into any discussion of this problem. All that may be said is that Mr. Anjaria tilts the balance to the other side too much. The faults he points out in the Hindu theory and practice beset almost all theories of the State almost in all countries. Even in the times of Plato and Aristotle huge popula tions of slaves had no voice in the affairs of the state. Up to the 19th century true democracies never existed oven in Europe. 

The Ruler--The necessity of a ruler is forcibly emphasized in several works. The Ait. Br. I. 14 says that the gods thought they were worsted because they had no king, that therefore they elected one by consent. This shows that military necessities 

. 218. Korkunov in General Theory of Law' (tr. by W. G. Hastings, New York, 1922) says 'Bluntschli' assimilates government to the head, as it is the head of the State, the ministry of the ioterior to the ears, and that of foreign affairs to the pose' (p. 274). 

DI] 

Matsyanyaya led to kingship. Manu VII. 3 ( =śukranitisāra I. 71 ) says the Creator created the king for the protection of all this world when everything ran through fear bither and thither, as there was then no ruler in the world'. It goes on to say that the Creator proceeded to create Daṇda (the power of punishment ) for the sake of the king and that if the king does not sedulously employ danda for punishing those that deserve it, the strong would torment the weak as fish are fried on a pike or as in water fish devour each other (Manu VII. 14 and 20, the last also showing a variant 'jale' for 'śūle'). This idea of mātsyanyaya ( the maxim of the larger fish devouring the smaller ones or the strong despoiling the weak) is frequently dwelt upon by Kautilya, the Mahābhārata and other works. It can be traced back to the Satapatha-brāhmaṇa XI. 1. 6. 24. whenever there is drought, then the stronger seizes upon the weaker, for the waters are the law ', which appears to mean that when there is no rain, the reign of law comes to an end and mātsyanyāya begins to operate. Kautilya says “if danda be not employed, it gives rise to the condition of mūtsyanyāya, since in the absence of a chastiser the strong devour the weak' and 'the people overwhelmed by the operation of mātsyanyāya made Manu Vaivasvata their king.' 83 That in the absence of a king (urājaka ) or when there is no fear of punishment, the condi tion of mātsyanyāya follows is declared by several works such as the Rāmāyana II. chap. 67, Santiparva 15. 30 and 67. 16, Kāmandaka II. 40, Matsyapurāna 225.9, Mānasollāsa II. 20 verse 1295. Numerous works contain eulogies of daṇda. The king is called dandadhara in many works e.g, in Santiparva 67.16 and Kām. I. 1. Gautama XI. 28 says that the word danda is derived by the wise from the root' dam '(to control ), that he (the king ) should control by means of danda those who observe no restraint and (XI. 31 ) that the instructions of the teacher and the power of punishment(wielded by the king) guard those who violate the rules of varṇas and aśramas. The Matsyapurāna 28 

YNY 

22. (nou) straftat na HTETETm arê inter 

TUR \#reisa I. 4; FTTYPIT TETT: 51 ng HTV T it I 1. I. 13; मत्स्या इव जना निस्य भक्षयन्ति परस्परम् । अयोध्या 67.31; दण्डमेल भवेल्लोके विनश्ये grat: : I nfrat ung PETIT: !1 e 15. 30 ; To Worte giurat a : 1 ... T TTT: 11 ṣi 67. 16; que me qiturit 

AIETI U14: IFTAR II. 40. 

23. यस्मादवान्तान्दमयस्यशिधापणापत्यपि । वमनाइनारक्षेष तस्माई पितु UT: \# \# 15. 8, Nr. 226. 16 (reads Throuro fa), A 225. 17 (reads can Qranta ).History of Dharmasastra 

[ Vol. 

state that danda 

suppresses those the 

m the root. dam 

%25. 17, Agnipurāṇa 226. 16 and Sāntiparva 15.8 state that danda is so called because it suppresses those that are not restrained (from the root 'dam') and punishes those that are imprudent or ungentlemanlike ( from the root' dand '). Danda is raised to the position of a divinity by Manu 24 VII. 25 (= Viṣṇudharma. sutra II. 95 = Matsya 225. 8), Yāj. I. 354, Santi 121. 15. Danda rules over all people, it protects all of them, danda is awake even when ( the guardians of law ) have gone to sleep, the wise regard danda as dharma ( Manu VII. 18=Sānti 15.2 = Matsya 225. 14-15). The whole world is under the heel of daṇda, for it is difficult to find a man who is pure by nature (Manu VII. 22 = Sānti 15. 34). The conception of danda is therefore this that the State's will and coercive power keep the indivi dual and nation within the bounds of dharma, punish for breaches and effect the good of the whole. The gods, dānavas, gandharvas, the rākṣasas and reptiles -- these also tend to bring about enjoyment for men because they are pressed down by danda (Manu VII. 23 ). The Bhagavadgitā (X. 38) identifies danda with the divine Kroṇa 'I am danda in the hands of those who control others, I am niti ( i. e. rājaniti ) for the conquerors'. For the detailed effects and long eulogies of danda, vide Manu VII. 14-31, Matsya 225. 4-17, Kāmandaka II: 38-44. These eulogies of danda presuppose the theory that people obey law and the dictates of the śāstra through the fear of force or punishment. Danda should be neither too severe nor too mild, but should be appropriate to the fault committed (Kaut. I. 4, Kāmandaka II, 37, Manu VII. 16, Santi 15. 1ff Santi 56. 21, 103. 34). Sānti 57. 41 advises that one should first secure a king, then wife and then wealth, for in the absence of the ruler there would be no wife nor private property. * This shows that the institutions of family and private property and the protection of the weak are bound up with the existence of a fuler. Kātyāyana (in Raja N. P. p. 30 ) says the king is the 

24. यत्र श्यामो लोहिताक्षो दण्डश्चरति पापहा। प्रजास्तत्र न मुह्यन्ति नेता साधु 4647 11 HE VII. 25 = HT 225. 8 = rhaguay: 96 III Fire ( 121. 15-16) has fleste mesta T ua: ... gang fegri que forma gere: $ 25. This appears to be suggested by the words of the Tai. Up. II. 8 

TIFATETT: gram wiriara : ANTEATT*Ty TTA: N? 

26. pro qua format reliant un parupat la sa g at WISE I STR. 57. 41. The first half is wraca 160. 12 ( Or. ed. 148.13). This verse is said to have been uttered by Bhargava. 

Divine character of kingship 

23 

protector of the helpless, the home of the homeless, the son of the sonless and the father of the fatherless. 

In order to magnify the importance of the kingly office, certain works state that the king has in him parts of the gods. For example, Manu says "the Creator created the king with the essential parts taken from Indra, the Wind god, Yama, the Sun, Agni, Varuna, the Moon and Kubera the lord of wealth and therefore he surpasses all beings by his majesty (VII. 4-5 and compare Manu V. 96 ); one should not disrespect a boy-king with the thought he is a human being ( like others )' for it is a great deity that stands ( before people) in human form as a king" (Manu VII. 8=Santi 68.40). This conception goes back to Gautama XI. 32 ( Therefore a king and a spiritual teacher must not be reviled') and Ap. Dh. S. I. 11. 31. 5 (' he shall not speak harsh or abusive words of the gods or of the king'). Manu VII. 3-4 are the same as Sukranitisāra 1.71-72. The Matsyapurāṇa 226. 1 states that the king was created by Brahmā by taking portions of gods for wielding the power of punishment for the protection of all beings. Manu ( IX. 303-311 ) puts forward a slightly diluted theory, viz, the king should possess the majesty of and imitate in his actions the first seven deities enumerated above with the Earth as the 8th and Manu sets out what the eight characteristic actions are. Matsya 226. 9-12 are the same as Manu IX. 303-306. The Agnipurāṇa ( 226. 17-20 ) states that as the king exercises the functions of nine deities viz. the Sun, the Moon, Vāyu, Yama, Varupa, Fire, Kubera, the Earth and Vispu he has the form of these. Vide Sukranitisāra I. 73-79 for similar ideas. These verses do not amount to the express theory of divine origin, but assimilate by analogy the king's functions to those of certain deities. The Nārada-smrti (prakirnaka section, verses 20-31 ) contains 27 several interesting dicta. It says that in the form of the king it is really Indra himself who moves about on the earth (v. 20 ), that a king even when devoid of qualities deserves honour from the people, that kings exercise the functions of five deities viz. of Agni, Indra, Soma, Yama 

37. titta EITTAT HEHEHTI ritgicha y a Fifa: \# पर संपाणि राजानो धारयन्स्यमितौजसः । अमरिन्द्रस्य सोमस्य यमस्य धनवस्य च। भयुधिर्षचनायस्य शुचिर्भपति माना । अचिवाशचिः सम्यक कथं राजा न दैवतम् ।। 

TOEF, watott 20, 22, 26, 52; TT Area AE : I T ATUT T rout C \# pilet. 67. 4; Feren says GC16Hwaga: Fun mitor fault i fred a more to FATEH UTC' il quoted by I AATTE III p. 16. * means RITA. 



| Vol. 

and Kubera (vv. 26-31). The Mārkandeyapurāna (27. 21-26 ) mentions the same five deities. "The Veda says that when a king is chosen it is Indra himself that is chosen; one desirous of prosperity should honour the king just as one worships Indra'-says Sānti 67, 4. Sānti 69 states that all the gods are invisible, but the king is a deity that can be seen. The Vāyu purana (57. 72 ) remarks 28 that in all past and futuro manvantaras universal emperors ( cakravartin) are born on the earth with parts of Viṣṇu. The Matsyapurāṇa (226. 1–12 ) mixes up the theory of the creation of the king from parts of the gods with the lesser idea of his functions being similar to those of certain deities. The Bhagavata-purāṇa (IV. 14. 26-27) states that Viṣṇu, Brahmā, Śiva, Indra, Vāyu, Varuṇa -- these and other gods-exist in the body of the king and that the king is full of (the parts of ) all gods. It is to strengthen this con ception that ancient kṣatriya dynasties and their panegyrists tried to trace for those dynasties descent from the Sun or the Moon and in later times from Fire. The practice of addressing the king as 'deva' in Sanskrit dramas is due to the same tendency of the glorification of the royal office. Asoka was styled 'devānām priya' (beloved of the gods ) and Kushana emperors like Kaniṣka and Huviska styled themselves Devaputra (E. I. vol. I. pp. 371 at pp. 381 and 386). This phenomenon is not confined to India. Alexander the Great and Julius Cæsar had their descent traced to gods and goddesses. Alexander was deified during his life-time in 324 B. C. by the Greek world (vide Cambridge Ancient History, vol. VI. p. 433 ) and Cæsar's image was carried among those of the immortal gods. Kautilya (I. 13 ) makes a spy say among pauras and jānapadas 'kings are (in) the place of (perform the functions of) Indra and Yama, since they visibly inflict punishment and bestow favours. Even divine punishment affects those who despise them ( kings ). Therefore kings should not be despised'. Hence it must be said that the conception of the divine nature of the kingly office was well-known in Kautilya's days and he was not above recommending the employment of this conception for safe guarding the king's position. Vide Rāmāyana, III. 1. 18-19 and VII. 76. 37-45 and Mārkandeyapurana 24. 23-28, Viṣṇudharmot tara IL 2. 9 for similar ideas. The phrase 'nā viṣṇuḥ prthivipatih' 

9 Carrier ancient in 324 8 

28. fervorhin rare great muf: I mig parang wataramag TE 57. 79; comparo cruft para 80 about prince Candrāpida 'PUT * पान्तरवारिणे भगवते वापीसने पुण्डरीकेशणाया. 

II 1 

Divine character of kingship 

is well-known and may be interpreted in two ways viz. the Tuler of the earth is Viṣṇu incarnated as man or no king is not Viṣṇu i. e. every king is Viṣṇu. The Pancatantra * (I. 120 p. 19) statos · Manu has declared that the king is made up (of parts) of all gods! The Rājanstiprakāśa is careful to point out that the idea of the king having in him parts of the deities applied only to the mahārāja ( the sovereign ruler), while the idea of a ruler doing the functions of five deities applies to vassal kings. 20 For eulogy of the kingly office, vide Manu VII. 6–17, śānti 63, 24-30, Sānti 68, Kām. I. 9-11, Rājanltiprakāśa pp. 17-31. 

But it should not be supposed that this glorification of the king resulted in the full-fledged theory of the divine right of kings or that every king, however bad, was looked upon as a divinity or could do what he liked. In the first place, the Rāja. nitiratnākara 31 (p. 83 ) when speaking of the coronation of a prince by his abdicating royal father quotes a verse where the peuple (prajā) themselves are called Viṣṇu. In the second place the king's authority over brāhmaṇas was limited ( vide H. Dh. vol. II. part 1 pp. 139-140). The Gautama-dharmasūtra ( XI. 1,7 and 8) says 3 'the king rules over all, except over brāhmaṇas; all, except brāhmanas, should while sitting low on the ground wait upon ( worship ) him ( the king ) who occupies a high seati they (the brāhmaṇas ) too should honour him'. From the time of the Ait. Br. (37.5) the harmony between the king and the brāhmaṇas and the king's following the advice of brāhmanas had been insisted upon. Vide Ait. Br. 40. 1, Gaut. VIII. 1. XI. 27. Further the Sukranitisāra (1 70) states that a king who oppresses the subjects and causes loss of dharma is made up of the parts of rūkṣasas. 33 Manu (VII. 111-112 ) states that 

29. सर्वदेवमयो राजा मनुना संप्रकीर्तितः । तस्मात्तमेष सेवेत न पलीकेन कहिचित् ॥ * I. Some editions read 42m. 

30. rū a tartETT FETTETE I mara... TF4 F ITTar a T164 y Trifta. . 20. Vide santi 

88. 41-47 for the five. 

31. Fra Hor (\#*) fagi \#TINO WTVJET: Irfar. p. 83. 

32. rat profite pa r agrematarveguretrate wita: Htet Heriot. XI. 1, 7-8. . XL, 7 is quoted by Auron VII6 and by \# 19 p. 17. 

38. T ETT NATION THAT sistem perut \#SITETET भषेत् । नीति I. 70% नीचहीनो वीर्यदशी बसेवी सुनीतिक । गुणिजष्टस्त यो राजा सशेषो देवताशक: विपरीतस्त रक्षोशःसनरकमाजमापशमशा नित्यं वत्सहायगणा: FAT . I. 86-87. 

26 



( Vol. 

the king who harasses his subjects loses his life, family and kingdom. Moreover stories of kings killed for their tyranny are found in the ancient Literature. For example, Vena, who was jealous of the gods, wanted sacrificial offerings to be made to himself (and not to the gods ) and violated dharma, was killed by the brāhmaṇas ( Sāntiparva 59. 93-95, Bhagavata purāna IV. 14). The Anuśāsanaparva 34 ( 61. 32-33 ) solemnly sanctions the killing of a king in certain circumstances " The people should gird themselves up and kill a cruel king who does not protect his subjects, who extracts taxes and simply robs them of their wealth, who gives no lead. Such a king is Kali (evil and strife ) incarnate. That king who after declaring 'I shall protect you' does not protect his subjects should be killed (by the people ) after forming a confederacy, like a dog that is afflicted with madness". Manu (VII. 27-28) states that the great principle of danda if properly wielded conduces to the advancement of the three puruṣārthas, but if a voluptuous, mean and unjust king wields it, it recoils on his head and destroys the king together with his relations. Kām. 2. 38 makes it clear that danda foolishly wielded might exasperate even hermits. The Santiparva 92. 19 recommends that a king who has false and very wicked ministers and who puts down dharma should be killed by the people. Even as early as the Tai. S. II. 3. 1 it appears that kings were driven away, while the Satapatha Brāhmaṇa ( XII. 9. 3. 1 and 3) mentions a king Dustaritu Paumsāyana who had been expelled from the kingdom which had descended to him through ten ancestors. The Sautrāmaṇi iṣti is prescribed as a rite for a king to regain a kingdom from which he had been driven away (vide H. Dh. vol. II. p. 1227). Sānti 92. 6 and 9, Manu VII. 27 and 34, Yāj. I. 356 appear to justify at least deposing a king, if not tyrannicide. Similarly, the Sukranitisāra ( II. 274-275 ) states as that a king, though of a noble pedigree, should be abandoned, if he violates dharma, if he hates good qualities ( in others ), lines of policy and the army and if his conduct would lead to the destruction of the kingdom and that the family priest with the consent of the principal 

34. armati Fakt ITTF19* erit py: 971: Furor \# भाई पो रक्षितेत्युक्त्या योन रक्षति भूमिपः । स संहस्य निहन्तव्यः ष सोन्माद आतुरः॥ NOTIF 61. 32-33; Eft mutu AQT I na 92. 19. 

35. gorafirati TUTTI I Tre Tea EITHER HRY F \# guy grifa: 1 46 47 Furta139am \# II. 274-275. 

III) 

King's liabilities 

officers of state should place on the throne another scion of the royal family who is possessed of the requisite virtues. Nārada props up the theory of divine right by stating that the king secures dominion over (lit. purchases ) his subjects by his austerities ( performed in former lives) and therefore the king is their lord ( prakirṇaka 25). Sukraniti I. 20 also brings in the doctrine of Karma ' the king holds the earth by the actions of his former lives and by his austerities.' Compare Manu VII. 111-112, Sānti 78. 36. The Sukranltisāra (IV. 7. 332-333 ) says that brāhmanas may even fight and destroy an oppressive ksatriya king and would thereby incur no sin. The Yasastilaka ( HII. p. 431 ) gives examples of kings killed by their subjects, one being a Kalinga king who made a barber his commander-in chief. In fact in all works on polity we find coinparatively little about the king's rights and special privileges, but on the other hand the greatest emphasis is laid on the king's duties and responsibilities. Some works describe the king as a servant of the people whose wages or remuneration for the protection he affords is the taxes he raises. Vide Baud. Dh. 8. I. 10. 1, Sukraniti I. 188, Nārada (prakırṇaka 48), Sānti 71. 10.36 It may be said here that the apparently inconsistent dicta about the divinity of the king and about his being liable to be deposed or even killed for evil deeds are delivered from two different standpoints and are addressed to different persons. The writers believed in maintaining the status quo about the duties of varṇas and asramas, in the privileges of the respective castes and in the progressive deterioration of dharma in the ages to come and wanted a strong king to preserve the social order; therefore the king was raised to divinity and absolute obedience to his orders was demanded. This was addressed to the people in general. There was danger however of bad kings and ministers oppressing the people by misrule. Hence the king and his ministers were threatened with destruction and death. These dicta were principally meant for the king and his advisers. 

In the Kauçiliya V. 3 we meet with these words “In Rajasūya and other solemn (or elaborate ) sacrifices the "rājn' gets three times the salary given to others who are as learned as he is" (samānavidyebhyas-triguṇavetano rājā rājasūyādiṣu 

36. अन्यप्रकारानुचिताइ भूमेः पहभागसंशितात् । बलिः स तस्य विहितः प्रजापालन THE 11 FREE ( **verse 48), wie 9 H Via TUTTUUNTE AT raa Pochur ar TAT I nf 71. 10; UT ETTE THI ; FR: WATOT FOTIA 

E T A FETA) ** I. 188. 

28 



(Vol. 

kratuṣu ). Jayaswal (in 'Hindu Polity' part II. p. 136 ) seices upon this passage to show that the king was a salaried person like the prime minister or the commander-in-chief. The words * in Rajasūya and other kratus' should have raised doubts in his mind about his interpretation, but he entirely missed the significance of the passage. Kautilya in that passage is not referring to the king himself but to his representative or deputy when the king is engaged in numerous ceremonial duties during sacrifices of long duration like the Asvamedha. The Ap. Srautasūtra (XX. 3. 1-2), Baudhāyana Srauta XV. 4, Satyāsādha Sr. XIV. 1. 24-25 state that the adhvaryu priest was to deputize for the king when the latter was engaged in the Aśvamedha 37 ( which was spread over a period of about two years). The salary referred to by Kautilya is to be paid to the adhvaryu when representing the king. Vide H. Dh. vol. II. p. 1232 for this. In X. 3 it is said by Kautilya that a virtuous king on the eve of a battle should urge on his soldiers the fact I am a wage-earner like yourselves, this kingdom is to be enjoyed by me along with you. You have to strike down the enemy pointed out by me". 88 Here the theory of the king being a wage-earner or a servant of the State is em. phasized in a striking manner, 

The word 'rājan' is derived in the Nirukta (II. 3) from the root 'rāj' to shine, but the Mahābhārata (Santi 59, 125 ) likes to say that the king is styled “rājā' since he keeps all people contented, that is, it derives the word 'rājan' from the root 'ranj'. Great poets like Kalidasa (Raghu IV. 12) follow the Mahābhārata in this, as also in deriving the word ‘ksatriya' from "kṣata' and the root 'trai', meaning one who protects from wound and injury (Śānti 59. 126 and Raghu-vamsa II. 53). Br. quoted in the Rāja. Dh. K. (I. p. 5) appears to derive the word both from 'rāj' and 'rañj' (balena caturangeṇa yato rañjayati prajaḥ 1 dipyamānaḥ sa vapuṣā tena rājābhidhsyate). 

There are in our authorities germs of several theories about the origin of kingship. Rg. X. 173 (which corresponds to 

37. *** Turcasa : 1 \# BE INTOH Troup ज्वपुरतोद्वा संवत्सरो राजा भविष्यतितस्प आभूषवं यो हास्य न शुभूषिष्यते सर्वस्वं 

जारपन्तीति । अथावरतो द्वौ संवत्सरोराजा भवति । यजमान इतीतरमाचक्षते । बौ. भी. XV. 4. 

38. paremus: sercu qui vont autant I HATE E 1979 Pe 1991 THU : imara X. 3. p. 567. 

III] 

Origin of kingship 

29 

Atharvaveda VI. 87 and 88.1-2) has been taken as an election hymn by some writers (0.8. Jayaswal in 'Hindu polity' p. 7). But one is constrained to say that it is probably nothing of the kind. The only words that may lend some colour to the theory of election are ' let all the people desire thee (as king)' in Rs. X. 173, 1, but those words may apply as a benediction even in the case of one who is already a king. In the Atharva veda III. 4. 2 there *' is a reference to the election of a king by the people the people (viśah) chose thee to govern the kingdom, these quarters, the five goddesses (chose thee)'. In Atharvavada III. 5, 6 and 7 also there is a faint allusion to the election of a king by nobles, king-makers, sūtas and headmen of villages, by the clever makers of chariots and the skilled workers in metals. These 'king-makers' are called 'ratnins' in other Vedic texts and the Tai. Br. I. 7.3 states in connection with the twelve offerings in the Rājasūya called 'ratninām havimṣi' that the 

ratnins' give the (rāṣtra) kingdom (to the king). Vide H. Dh. vol. II. p. 1215 n 2648 and p. 1216 for the 'ratnins'. So it appears that the conception was that the king got the kingdom from nobles, high functionaries and the common people. For the coronation bath (and its implications) mentioned in the Ait. Br. vide note 105 below. The Ayodhyākānda (chap. 1 and 2) describes how Dasaratha when he grew old desired to make his eldest son Rāma the Crown Prince (yuvarāja), how he called together an assembly of vassal kings, citizens and rural inhabi tants and placed before the assembly his idea, how they acclaimed loudly the old emperor's proposal and readily gave their consent. This shows that though kingship became hereditary in course of time some element of popular approval was sought for. But such passages referring to the approval of the people cannot be stretched to mean that the king was chosen by a parliament the members of which were elected by the people. All that happened appears to have been only this that citizens that approved assembled spontaneously and expressed their feelings in the assembly. In the Rāmāyaṇa II. 67. 2 it is said that when Dasam ratha died sages like Mārkandeya and Vāmadeva declared along with the amatyas in the presence of the family priest (purohita) Vasiṣtha that as Rama and Lakṣmana had gone into exile and Bharata and Satrughna were in the Kekaya country, some scion 

39. at forsit qopart 75919 TUFAAT: Afeat: q : I w IIL 4. 2; पेराजानोराजकता सता ग्रामण्यमये । उपस्तीम् पर्ण मा सरकण्वभितो जमान् । MY III. 5. 7. 



[Vol 

of the Ikṣvāku race should be chosen as king. These sages and ministers are spoken of as king-makers ('rāja-kartārab') here and in chap. 79. 1. In the Adiparva 44. 6 it is stated that all the citizens of the capital in one voice elected Janamejaya, though a boy, as a king on the death of Parikṣit and Janamejaga ruled with the help of his ministers and purohita. There are histo rical examples of the election of kings. The kṣatrapa Rudradā man was elected king by the people of Surāṣtra (who at one time formed a republic, acc. to Kautilya XI. 1) and he took an oath as stated in his Junagadh inscription in the year 72 (150 A. D.). *0 Vide E. I Vol. VIII p. 36 at p. 40. Gopāla, the founder of the Pāla dynasty of Bengal (730-740 A. D.), was elected a king (E. I. Vol. IV, p. 243 at p. 248 and Jayaswal's History of India,' 150-350 A. D. pp. 44-45). It appears that it was the business of the chief ministers and brāhmaṇas to propose some body as king and such persons were called 'rājakartāral'. In Ayodhyā 67. 8 they say 'our country is without a ruler and may therefore encounter disaster'. Arājaka does not necessarily mean in Ayodhyā 67 anarchy but a condition in which there is no king nor ruler. Though this is so, it is not possible to agree with Mr. K. P, Jayaswal ('Hindu Polity', part I, pp. 97-98, 134, 173) that'arājaka' was 'an idealistic constitution, that it was an extreme democracy almost Tolstoian in ideal, that it was based on a legal and communal basis, that it was a case of extreme individualism in which government itself was regarded as an evil.' Ayodhya 67. 8-31, Adi, 41. 27 ff., Santi 67. 3 ff., Matsyapurāṇa 225. 8-9 are the principal passages on arājaka. A perusal of these will convince any one not carried away by the over-patriotic desire to find the latest European thought in our ancient books that arājaka was viewed as a state of chaos and the negation of any constitution; that when a country was without a ruler, no private property in anything existed or was respected and people preyed upon each other like fishes (Ayo dhyā 67, 31) and that no Tolstoian ideals were present before the eyes of the writers that drew such a harrowing picture of a State without a ruler. The famous Chinese traveller Hiouen Thsang notices (vide Beal's Buddhist Records of the Western World, 1884, vol. I. pp. 210-216) that when Rajyavardhana was 

___40. आ गर्भात्मभूत्यविहतसमुदितराजलक्ष्मीधारणगुणतः संबवणैरभिगम्य रक्षणार्थ gfara a HT sro TTFTTTTTURTU HTTP HTTÀGI E. I. vol. VIII. D. 36 st p. 40; Arrarargai agfafweren TOTES: 

S OT Fiat fheimferret HÔTEATET: \# E. I. vol. IV. p. 243 at p. 248 about the 

III ) 

Election of a king 

31 

treacherously murdered by king Saśānka, the great minister Bhandin (who was also a cousin of Harsa) called an assembly of ministers and made to the young Harṣavardhana a proposal to assume the royal authority, which proposal was backed up by all the ministers and magistrates, that thereupon Harṣa agreed to become king after consulting the oracle of Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva. After the death of Parameśvaravarman II (of the Pallava dynasty), when the Pallava kingdom was subject to anarchy, the subjects chose a king. For the details of this elec tion, vide the important constitutional document of the Vai kuntha Perumal temple (Dr. C. Minakshi's 'Administration and Social life under the Pallavas', 1938, p. 38). The Rājatarangipi narrates (V. 461-463) that Yasaskara who was originally a poor man was chosen as king by the brāhmaṇas. 

In some other places a theory somewhat like the theory of social contract expounded by Rousseau is adumbrated. The theory of social contract is presented in modern times under two forms. In one there is supposed to be a tacit or explicit agreement between the Government and the people. In the 2nd form it is supposed that a political society was constituted by a compact among individuals (to which the ruler was not a party). This theory puts forward the notion that government depended on the consent of the people. Kautilya (I. 13) refers to the legend that Manu Vaivasvata was made a king by the people, who agreed to assign one-sixth of the grain raised by them ag the king's share in return for the protection afforded by him. But Kautilya is silent as to whether Manu made any promise to the people. Sāntiparva, chap. 59, states how Vainya, the first king, was called upon by the gods and sages to take an oath and how he promised them that he would protect the world, and would carry out his duties as laid down in the science of govern ment and not act at his sweet will." When this theory of an agreement between the king who took an oath and the people spread among the people, the theory of the divine right of kings, if ever seriously held, would recede more and more into the back-ground. Vide Dr. Beni Prasad's 'Theory of Government in Ancient India'chap. VIII and 'Pro-Buddhist India' (1939) by Mr. R. N. Mehta, chap. II pp. 79 ff. and 101 for election of 

41. fent miceu T or FITTI MT969147 \# ventare चासत् ॥ पश्चात्र धर्मो नीरपुक्तो दण्डनीतिग्यपामयः । तमशः करिष्यामि स्वरको न ATT I fourt 9. 106-108.History of Dharmasastra 

(Vol 

kings and for Buddhist theories of government. It is not possi ble to hold as Jayaswal, U. Ghosal and others do (e. g. 'Manu and Yajnavalkya' II, 'Hindu Polity' part II pp. 54-57) that the theory of social contract was the earlier one and that the theory of divine right of kings was later on propounded by the Manu smrti to support the brāhmana empire of Puṣyamitra. Jaya swal is wrong in saying (in 'Hindu Polity' part II p. 57) 'the theory of the Mānava was never approved or adopted by a single subsequent law-book'. It has been shown above that Nārada and others espoused the same theory. Manu himself eulogises the supreme power of daṇda over the king himself (Manu VII. 28). He makes use of both the theories as occasion demands. 

The germ of the theory of Divine Right of kings probably goes back even to the Rgveda. Rg. IV. 42 is a hymn of king Tragadasyu, son of Purukutsa. Some of the ideas therein are startling enough. He says 'the gods rely on the might of Varuṇa, while I am the lord of the people (verse 1, krutum sacante Varunasya devā rājāmi krsteh &c); I am Indra and Varuṇa, I am the wide and the deep Heaven and Earth, I am the son of Aditi (verses 3 and 4)'. Here there is an explicit claim by a king to be identical with the mightiest and greatest gods of the Vedic pantheon. In the Atharvaveda VI. 87.1-2 it is said about the king ‘May all the people long for you, may not the kingdom be lost from your hands, may you stand firm in the world like Indra and may you uphold the kingdom'. In the Satapatha Brāhmaṇa V. 1. 5. 14 (when describing the shooting of arrows in the Vājapeya) it is said 'the rājanya is most manifestly of Prajāpati, while being one he rules over many'. Here the posi tion of the rājanya appears to be regarded as due to his being the representative of Prajāpati. In the Sat. Br. V. 4. 3. 4 the sacrificer in the Rājasūya is identified with Indra and it is said that that position is due to two causes viz. (1) his being a member of the kṣatriya order and (2) his participating in a solemn sacrifice. But passages like the last and Sat. Br. V. 1. 3. 4, V. 1. 4. 2, V. 2. 2. 14 should not be relied upon in support of the theory of the divine right of kings (as done by U. Ghoshal in * Hindu Political Theories', pp. 28-29), since every participator (whether a brāhmaṇa or a kṣatriya) in such solemn sacrifices as the Agnistoma and Vājapeya was supposed to possess a celes tial body after dikṣā and Pravargya and was often spoken of as identified with Indra and other gods. Viśvarūpa on Yāj. I. 350 quotes a long vedic passage (agama) in which it is stated "tho gods said to Prajapati 'we shall arrange for a king in fiuman 

TII ) 

Origin of kingship 

form by taking from the moon, the sun, Indra, Viṣṇu, Vaiśra vapa (Kubera) and Yama respectively majesty, brilliance, valour, victoriousness, liberality and control" and that the king thus formed asked the gods to give to him Dharma as his friend and that then he would protect the people and then the gods made Dharma (i. e. danda) his friend. 

We may examine the theories of the origin of kingship in the Mahābhārata. The śāntiparva deals with this subject in two places, in chap. 59 and 67. In chap. 59 Yudhiṣthira asks the great warrior and statesman Bhiṣma how the title 'king' arose and how one man, who has fundamentally the same physical and mental equipment as other men, rules over all men. These are not really two questions but only two aspects of the same question. Then Bhisma starts by saying that there was originally a state of perfection (Kṛtayuga) in which there was no king, no kingdom, no punishment and no chastiser. Gradually moha (delusion or aberration of mind) spread among people and then greed, sexual desire and passions arose and the Vedas and dharma perished. The gods did not receive offerings and went to Brahma, who composed a vast treatise as stated above (p. 4 ) that dealt with the four goals of existence for the benefit of the world and that was the cream of learning. Then the gods went to Viṣṇu and requested him to appoint (as king) one who deserved to be the best among men. Viṣṇu created a son from his mind called Virajas who did not want to be a king. Fifth in descent from Virajas was Vena who destroyed dharma and so the brāhmaṇas killed him and from his right arm they churned Pșthu, handsome, well-armed and proficient in the Vedas, Vedāngas and Daṇdaniti. Gods and sages asked him to follow settled dharma, to control his senses and to take an oath (set out above in note 41). He was crowned by the gods and sages for the protection of the people. Vispu himself esta blished him saying 'Oh king, no man will go contrary to your order' and then Vianu entered the king Pșthu (verse 128) and it is therefore that this world since then bows to kings as to gods. In this account the oath administered to Pṛthu was so administered by the gods and sages and not by the people in the mags, nor does Pfthu expressly promise anything to the people as such. Probably it was thought that the promise to the sages was impliedly a promise to the people in general. But the account, such as it is, rather appears to emphasize the divine origin of kingship. 

34 



( Vol. 

Chap. 67 contains a much shorter version of the origin of kingship, probably because a few chapters before another vers ion has already been given or because it embodies the views of some prior work or teacher. It begins by saying that the most desirable thing for a State is to crown a king, that in a kinglese country there is no dharma, no security of life nor of property, that therefore the gods appointed kings for protecting people. Then it proceeds to say that the people assembled and made compacts ( sumuyān) amongst themselves that whoever would commit libel or assault or adultery and break the compacts made by the people should be abandoned. All people went to Brahmā and requested him to appoint a ruler whom they would all honour and who would protect them. Brahmā appointed Manu for that purpose, but Manu did not at first like the idea, saying 'Govern ment is a very difficult business among men who are always deceitful and I am afraid of the sinful acts of men'. The people asked him not to be afraid as the sing committed by men will affect the perpetrators (and not Manu) and that the people would give him shares of produce (one-tenth of grain, one-fifth of cattle, one-fourth of their dharma &c.). Manu then agreed, went round the world, terrorizing evil-doers and making them conform to dharma. This story about Manu and the people is alluded to by Kautilya (vide p. 31 above). Even here Manu promises nothing expressly, while the people agree to pay taxes and answer for their own sins. There is no doubt that some of the details in the two chapters are different. In chap. 67 there is no reference to an original state of perfection nor to a yast work nor to any oath; so also in one it is Vainya who becomes the first king and in the other it is Manu. But the conception in both is mythological and the fundamental fact in both is the same. God gives a king to the people in both, when they were without a king and degeneracy had set in. Though there is no offer to give a share in chap. 59 yet it is to be inferred from the matijñā of Vainya that every subsequent king was deemed to do the same. It may be said that in chap. 67 there is a blending of the theory of Divine Right and of an original compact between king and people. In both, however, the emphasis is on the theory of the divine origin of kingship. Santi 67. & states *one desirous of prosperity should honour the king as one, honours Indra', while chap. 59, 139 asks "what is the cause but the divine character (the king possesses) on account of which people remain under his control'? It must be said that in both 

II) 

Origin of kingship 

35 

chapters of the Sāntiparva there is no proper theory of contract between king and people. 

The Nāradasmrti as indicated above (pp. 23,27 and note 27) is a thorough-going advocate of the theory of divine right. It says (prakirṇaka 20-22 ) It is Indra himself who moves about on the earth as king; people can nowhere live after transgressing his orders. Since the privilege of protection is his because of his supreme power (inajesty ) and on account of the fact that he is benign to all creatures, the settled rule is that whatever a king does is right. Just as the husband, though weak, must be honoured by the wife, so a ruler though devoid of qualities must be honoured by his subjects'. Verse 25 inculcates the duty of obedience to the king. 

According to Mr. J. N. Figgis in his book The divine right of kings' (1934) pp. 5–6, the theory of the Divine Right of kings in its completest form involved the following propositions : (I) monarchy is a divinely ordained institution; (II) hereditary right is indefeasible i. e. the right acquired by birth and descend ing by the law of primogeniture cannot be forfeited through any acts of usurpation, or by any incapacity of the heirs or by any act of deposition; (III) kings are accountable to God alone, i.e. a limited monarchy is a contradiction in terms; (IV) non resistance and passive obedience are enjoined by God i. e. in any circumstances resistance to the king is a sin and leads to damnation and that when the king issues a command directly contrary to God's law, the latter is to be obeyed and also all penalties attached to the breach of the king's law are to be patiently borne. This theory was very much to the fore in the 16th and 17th centuries when in Europe theology and politics were in close union. 

It is to be seen how far the ancient Hindu theory agreed with this full-fledged theory of the divine right of kings. As regards proposition I it has been shown above that the Manusmrti, the Mahābhārata and other works held that the king was either God himself, or god's vicar or vicegerent performing functions similar to those of several gods. As regards proposi tion II all Sanskrit works recognised hereditary right and primogeniture, but they allowed exceptions as will be shown later on. Our ancient books did not accept the third and the fourth propositions in toto. They say that the king cannot do as he likes, that he has to carry out the diotates of dharma, his 

36 



[ Vol. 

power to make new rules is limited and if he does not act up to the rules of dharma he may be deposed, disobeyed or killed. Vide quotations from Sukraniti and Anuśāsanaparva cited above. When Manu (VII. 111-112) says that a king who harasses his kingdom loses his life, his family and his kingdom, it is implied that people are not bound to suffer silently all the wrongs heaped upon them by a bad king but that they may turn round and either depose him or kill him. Fick (pp. 103-104) gives examples from the Buddhist Jatakas where bad kings were killed by the people and others were elected in their place. There is no doubt that obedience to the king is enjoined by Nārada and others, but it is due to the king only so long as he does not swerve from the path of right and virtue. Nārada * (prakirṇaka verses 12 and 32 ) says 'on account of his majesty and sanctity a king and brāhmana are not to be abused if they do not swerve from the right path; one should not treat with contempt or scold the king, one should abide by his order, since (the penalty of) death may follow from violating it (king's order )'. Here the duty of obedience is not based on the divine origin of kingship, but on the practical wordly ground that an offended king may punish with death. Nārada's doctrine does not lead to the requirement of absolute submission and non-resistance to a wicked king. 

It is impossible to hold that the theory of divine right was put forward as a counterblast to the theory of social contract. The theory of divine right would arise very naturally even in the oldest days, while the theory of social contract is the product of a more advanced stage of political thought. The theory of divine right is not more absurd than the theory of social con tract and was popularly hold not only in India, but in many Christian countries, relying on passages in the Bible such as Daniel 4 and Romans 13, 1-7. The theory of divine right was circumscribed in India by another theory from very ancient times. The cry of the American colonists against England in the 18th century was that taxation and representation went hand in hand ; that of the ancient Hindu political and dharmaśāstra writers was that taxation and protection went hand in hand (see n. 45). Baud. Dh. S. I. 10. 1. says the king being hired for the sixth 

42. अनिर्देश्यावनियोच राजामामण पप च । दीप्तिमत्वानुचिस्वाच्च यदिन स्यात्पथप्रयुतः ॥ तपाकीता प्रजा राज्ञा प्रभुरासांततो खूपः ततस्तद्वचासि स्थेय वार्ता चासो तदाश्रयातस्मात्त भावजानीयामाकोशेचविशेषतः आज्ञायां चास्य तिष्ठेत मृत्युः स्यात्तत् FASHT \# ICT ( do 12, 25, 32). Vide Manu VII. 12-13, Gautama XI. 32. ( r8jdobrydyanindyau). 

Grounds of political dhligation 

part ( that he takes as tax) should protect the subjects'. Yaj. I. 337 states The king shares half of that evil which the subu jects do when not protected by the king, since he takes taxes (from the people)' and Yaj. I. 334 lays down that a king who proteots according to śāstras receives the 6th part of the merit (puṇya) of the subjects. Sāntiparva (57. 44-45) states 'One should abandon six persons like a leaking boat in the ocean vis. a teacher who does not explain, a priest who does not study the Veda, a king who does not protect &c.' Sukraniti I. 121 affirms 'the gods destroy a king who does not protect, a brāhmaṇa who does not perform austerities, a wealthy man who makes no gifts, Vide Vasiṣtha I. 44-46, Gaut. XI. 11, Viṣṇu Dh. 8. III. 28, Udyoga parva 132. 12, śānti 67. 27 ( 4th part of pupya), Santi 24. 12 ( 4th part), Santi 72. 20, Aśramavāsi 3.40, Anuśāsana 61.34 and 36, Kām. II. 10 for the idea that the king receives a part (generally 6th part) of the puṇya (and also sin) of the people. The king had to protect even forest hermits who paid no taxes, as he would share in their puṇya 48. Vide Rāmāyaṇa III. 6. 14. Kālidāsa echoes this in the Sakuntala II. 13. Adiparva 213.9 looks upon the king who takes the sixth part as tax and affords no protection as the arch-sinner in the world. Sānti 71.29 says that the spiritual merit that a king gathers by protection according to the sacred code yields rewards for him in heaven for ten thousand years. 

From the preceding pages it is clear that the following are put forward as the grounds on which the obligation to render obedience to the ruler is based: (1) the king has divinity in him, (2) the great utility of the ruler affording protection as regards life, liberty and property, (3) the fear of punishment (Manu VII. 22), (4) a primeval contract between the ruler and the people, (5) the interdependence of the ruler and the people as parts of one organism (viz, the State). Vide Medhātithi on Manu IX. 294 for this last. 

Who should be king? There were several views on this point. One meaning of the word 'rājan' is ‘ksatriya', Manu (VII. 1) states that he will declare rājadharmas and in the very next verse he employs the word “ksatriya' and remarks that a ksatriya who has undergone the upanayana sarskāra (or abhiseka according to some commentators) should afford protection to all in his kingdom. Therefore a ksatriya is the most proper person 

, 43. प्रत्करोति पर धर्म इनिर्मलफसाशनः । तत्र रामतर्भागा मजा धर्मेण रक्षतः । arraum 6. 14, 



( Voi. 

to be a king. Some of the works such as the Rajadharma-kaus tubha, Rājanitiprakāśa, the Nitimayūkha, and Par, M. vol. I. pp. 449-451 refer to the discussion in the Pūrvamimānsā works on the topic of the Avesti sacrifice. On Jaimini II. 3.3 Sabara and Kumārila hold an elaborate discussion. The Vedic texts say "rājā rājasūyena yajeta' ('the Rājasūya should be performed by a rajan'). Among the numerous constituents of that sacrifice there is an iṣti called Aveṣti, with reference to which a vedic passage says 'if a brāhmaṇa performs avesti. he places the āhuti (offering) for Bphaspati in the middle, if a ksatriya performs it the offering to Indra is placed in the middle of the offerings &c.'. The pūrvapakṣa (prima facie view) is that the word 'rājan' applies to any one (whether a brāhmaṇa, a kṣatriya or a vaisya) who protects the people. The siddhanta (the established conclusion) is that in this text the word rājan means a kṣatriya and that by the other passage about brah maṇas &o, what is meant is that brāhmaṇas and vaisyas may independently perform the Aveṣti sacrifice, but that only a ksatriya can perform the Aveṣti as part of the Rājasūya rites. Sabara makes the interesting remark that in the Andhra country the word 'rājan' is applied to a man of the ksatriya caste even though he does not pursue the occupation of protecting a country or a city; while Kumārila observes that persons of all the four varpas are seen as rulers of kingdoms. ** In the literature on dharmaśāstra the word 'rājan' is understood in the sense of one whoʻrules over or protects a country' (i. e. the pārvapakṣa view 

in the Pūrvamīmānsā). Vide Medhātithi on Manu VII. 1. Aparārka"s (on Yāj. I. 366) remarks "when he who is not a kṣatriya performs the work of a kṣatriya (i. e. becomes a king) he should do all this ( that a ksatriya king has to do) since the maxim is 

that by assuming the position or the work of a particular person or thing one receives what is due to that other' and the 

44. min 

13. II. 3. 3; W thoryfer \#OQEAT HITT ISTITETATUT: gera 17: I Tyr (p. 580 ); my $174. hratge i Pol: gefa TM 1931 rahat p. 580. 

45. ** Egea 1794 : Arany i warg a: 147 कुर्यातदानेनाप्यतत्सर्षमष्ठेयम् । तस्कार्यापश्या सद्धर्मलाभः इति न्यायात् । करादानप्रयुक्त 

प्रजापालनस्य । सर्वो हि धनं प्रयच्छतात्मसमवापि प्रयोजमविशतिनकरदामस्थ स्वयमेरम्परायोजनमस्ति । तस्मात्करमावदामेन प्रजापालन विधेयमिति सिद्धम् । अपरार्क, on 97. I. 366. This maxim is taken from the \#enter on the frst malone on पाणिलिI. 1. 56 'लोके यो यस्य प्रसङ्के भवति लभतेऽसो तत्कायर्याणि । सयथा । उपापापस्य frant 149 numrefter Kielborn'a od. vol. I. p. 133. Its form in grammatioal works is para PAMTITI I 

Who should be king 

39 

duty of protecting the subjects arises from the fact of taking taxes from them. For everyone when giving wealth doos 80 with reference to a purpose related to himself and there is no purpose except one's protection that is intended in rendering taxes. Hence it is established that whoever receives taxes must secure protection of the subjects". According to Kullūka the word 'rājan' means 'any person who is crowned king and pro tects the country and capital' and is not used in the sense of a person of the kṣatriya caste'. The Rājanitiratnakara (p. 2) after citing Kullūka and Kamadhenu states that many hold that "rājan' means any one who takes upon himself the task of protecting the subjects'. The Rājanitiprakāśa holds a long discussion (pp. 10-15), states that the word 'rājan'may have three meanings viz. any one who protects people, a kṣatriya in general or a ksatriya who is crowned and ultimately gives it as its opinion that the word 'rājan' is applied in popular usage to any one, whether crowned as king or not, who is the ruler of a country. The Vaijayanti on Viṣṇu Dh. S. III. 44 explaing *rājāām' as 'of kṣatriyas' by following the Aveṣti māxim. 

Several brāhmaṇa families founded kingdoms and empires. Pusyamitra, founder of the Sunga empire, was a brāhmaṇa (Harivamsa III. %. 35 ff, E. I. vol. 20 p. 54 ); the Kāṇvāyanas, who followed the Sungas, were brāhmaṇas and so were the Vākātakas, the Kadambas (vide Talagunda pillar Inscription of Kakusthavarman in E. I. vol. VIII. p. 24) and several others. Vide H. Dh. vol. II. pp. 122–123 for texts on the question as to when a brāhmaṇa should follow the profession of arms. Manu XI. 100 states that a brāhmaṇa who knows the Veda deserves to be made a king, a commander-in-chief, the wielder of the power of punishment. Kumārila's dictum that persons of all varṇas are seen to be rulers has been already quoted. Gopāla the founder of the Pāla dynastry of Bengal was a sūdra. Manu IV, 61 directs a brāhniana not to stay in a country where the ruler was a sūdra. Medhātithio explains this by saying 

46. अपग्रहणेन जनपदैश्वर्यवतोधिकारमाह । प्रमाणान्तरमूला सत्र धर्मा अध्यन्ते न सर्वे 

T: 1 Arte on A VII. 1; Turnament WHETHE HET MEY: 9377 पालन परो धर्म: थापिएपग्रहणसमभिग्याहारसदनभिषिक्तपि जनपदेपर्यपति लोकप्रसिद्भशा राजशब्दोपर्वते । राजनीतिम.p. 14 अयोधिपायेन राज्ञां क्षत्रियाणां न पार्थिवानामेव जयन्ती. 

47. twaqt offers a Thai afroamerique TUT: \#\# 99 तयोराण्यं यत्र सर्वाः सपजातीया: सत्र निवासनिषेधोयम् । मेधा. on मा IV. 61. It is not clear who yet (inflicter of punishment?) is. Should we read quand (as in the Valabbi plates in E. I. XI. pp. 83 and 94 or XV. p. 257) or wro (as in E. I. IX. p. 289 or E. I. XX. p. 7)? . 



(Vol. 

that the prohibition applies only to a country where all the seven high functionaries such as the chief minister, the commander in-chief are of the sūdra caste; compare Ap. Dh. 8. I. 11. 32. 18. Manu's dictum related to a time when there was hardly any sūdra king. But the logic of facts was too much for Medhātithi who had to twist the plain words of Manu. Medhātithi on Manu VIII. 1 remarks that persons of other varṇas who subsist by the mode prescribed for ksatriyas have power over the kingdom and have to protect the people'. Santiparva remarks that whoever protects people from the hordes of dasyus and wields the power of punishment according to smrti rules must be considered as king. The Harivamsa (III. 3. 6 *akṣatriyāśca rājāno viprāḥ sūdropajivinah') and some of the Purāṇas in depicting the awful degeneracy of the Kali age in a prophetic strain state that the kings in the Kali age will be mostly sūdras and that sūdra kings will celebrate Aśvamedha sacrifices. Vide, for example, Matsya 144.40 and 43 and Linga purīna 40.7 and 42. Hiouen Thsang notices that in the first half of the 7th century A. D. Sind was under a sūdra king ( Beal's B. R. W. W. vol. II. p. 272 ). 

It was almost a universal rule that a male alone was to be the ruler. There appear to have been stray exceptions. The Santiparva ( 33.43-46 ) enjoins " upon a conqueror the duty to place on the throne of a conquered country the brother, son or grandson of the vanquished king and if no prince be available, then to crown even the daughter of the late king. The Raja tarangini (V. 249 and VI. 332) describes at great length the regime of the notorious queens Sugandhā (904-906 A. D.) and Diddā ( 980-81 A. D.) of Kashmir, In India for many centuries there has been no Salic Law expressly declaring that daughters cannot inherit land, though on account of the general position of women, the requirements of disturbed times and military necessity women did not generally assume the role of sovereigns. In a copper-plate grant from Ganjam (of about the 13th century) it is stated that when a certain king named Subhākara died his queen ascended the throne and after her her daughter Dandi mahadevi, who is styled parama-bhattarika-mahārājā dhiraja parameśvari' ruled the earth for a long time ( E. I. vol. VI p. 133 at p. 138). Whether the grandiloquent titles were deserved by the queen or were only the exaggerated effusions of a courtier, 

. 48. देषां पुरनिराहाणि गप्पा राजन साधारन पुत्रास पोधि से राम्ये. 

** ... cara mudar framfarisma 33. 43 and 45. 

II 1 

Women as rulers 

it is clear that the widow and daughter of the last male ruler succeeded to the throne. The Raghuvamsa (XIX. 55, 57 ) states that the widowed queen of king Agnivarṇa sat on the throne and carried on the government with the help of hereditary ministers. 

Apart from conquest and election in rare cases, monarchy was hereditary and generally descended by primogeniture. The passage from the Satapatha Brāhmaṇa (XII. 9.3, 1 and 3) mentioning the descent of kingship for ten generations in succession has already been referred to (p. 26). Though succession was hereditary it was the general rule that the eldest son ascended the throne when the reigning monarch died or abdicated. The rights of the eldest son or daughter as against the younger son or daughter were very jealously guarded in the vedic age. It has already been shown how marrying before one's elder brother or sister was condemned in the vedio age and also in the times of the smṛtis (H. Dh. II. pp. 546-549). Even the Rgveda several times refers to jyaiṣthya (rights of seniority) of Indra (Rg. 1.5.6, TII. 50.3). The Tai. S. II. 2.11.5 states that the gods agreed to treat Indra as the "jyestha' (the eldest) and Tai. S. II. ** 5.2.7 refers to the ancient practice of giving all wealth (of the father) to the eldest son, The Ait. Br. 19,4 narrates the story that the gods did not accept Indra's position as the oldest and most exalted among them and that Indra then induced Bphaspati to perform the Dvādaśāha sacrifice for him, whereby he secured that position. The Nirukta II. 10 sets out the interesting story that Devāpi and Santanu were two brothers, scions of the Kuru family, of whom Devāpi was the eldest, but Santanu the younger one got himself crowned king and so Devāpi practised austeri ties. The result was that there was a drought in Santanu's kingdom for 12 years. The brāhmaṇas said to him "You are guilty of having violated dharma in that passing over the eldest brother you got yourself crowned. Therefore God does not send down rain'. Then Santanu desired to give the kingdom to Devāpi, who however said that he would be his purohita and make him perform a sacrifice. The Rgveda hymn X, 98 was then composed by Devāpi for bringing down rain. This story shows how long before Yāska the popular belief was that it was a great sin to 

49. 1998 H Van Para TGIFTER. H. II. 5.2.7. Ap. Dh. S. ( II. 6. 14.19-13) cites this text and says that it is a more anuvāda and not a vidhi and gives it as its own view that sons equally share the paternal wealthi.History of Dharmajāstra 

[ Vol 

pass over an elder brother in marriage and other matters and doing so brought down the serious displeasure of the gods. Vide Brhad-devatā. VII. 156-157 and VII. 1-9 for the same story in a little greater detail, viz. that Devāpi suffered from a skin disease, that when Devāpi said to the subjects that he did not deserve the kingdom and that Santanu should be their king, the subjects crowned Santanu as king. When Yayati desired to pass over his elder sons Yadu and others because they disobeyed him and wanted to make the younger Pūru his successor the brāhmaṇas and citizens protested “How can the younger son secure the kingdom passing over the elder one 80'? Arjuna upbraids Bhimasena who got enraged against Yudhisthira * who would act against one's eldest brother that follows the path of dharma?' (Sabhā 68.8). In the Rāmāyaṇa 51 Dasaratha addresses Rāma (II. 3.40 ) ' you are born of my eldest queen, who is of the same class as myself (i. e. of ksatriya blood)' and Vasiṣtha says to Rāma 'Among all Ikṣvākus the eldest son becomes the king'; a younger brother is not crowned king when the elder exists' (II. 110.36 ). The Ayodhyākā da in Beveral places (8.23-24, 101.2 ) reiterates the idea that all the song of a king do not succeed but only the eldest, although the other sons may be equally fit and endowed with qualities. Kautilya (I. 17) 52 states that people esteem rulership going to the eldest except in the case of some calamity. Manu IX, 106 says that by the very birth of the eldest son, a man becomes free from the debt he owes to his pitts and there fore the eldest deserves to get everything from the father. The Rajadharma-k. ( pp. 234-235 ) after quoting the Kālikāpurāpa and the Rāmāyana lays down the following propositions:(1) the aurasa son of a king alone succeeds in preference to the eleven kinds of secondary sons (whether he is junior or senior in age); (2) if the son of a junior queen ( of the same caste ) is senior by birth, he succeeds in preference to the son of the senior queen, 

50. a Statuta efrana trga i ... Haftalar Qah : at 1 \#g: ro ma Puhr \# mane 85. 22 and 25** *93. 79 and 81. 

51. ज्येष्ठायामपि मे परल्या सदश्यां स: सुतः । उत्पमस्त्वं गुणम्पेष्ठो मम मात्मजा fare: 1... gegurita otet7THC I prvir perox II3. 39-41. These are quoted in riset. p. 234 and Traitor II. p. 13 ( with variations ). Fitot ft print 75 T : I got PT: HTT test tamirano 

TT 110. 36. 

52. Wou dag of ūgnini (1) \#goodt i test 1 17 last torse but one. 

HI) 

Rules of succession to the throne 

who (son) is younger in age; (3) if two sons are born to two queens at the same moment, the son of the senior queen is preferred ; (4) if twins are born to the senior queen, the son who is born first is to be preferred. 

If the eldest son suffers from a physical or mental defect (such as blindness or lunacy) he is to be passed over and his younger brother becomes king (vide Manu IX, 201 for grounds of exclusion from inheritance). Adiparva $3 109. 25 states that Dhstarāstra because he was blind did not succeed to the kingdom, Vide also Udyoga 147, 39. The Sukranitisāra (1. 343-344) states that if the eldest prince suffers from deafness, dumbness, blindness, leprosy or impotence he is unfit to rule and that in such a case his younger brother or son should succeed. The Sukranitisāra further points out that by dividing a kingdom among the several princes no benefit results, but on the contrary the small parts would fall an easy prey to enemies; therefore when the eldest alone succeeds he should make his younger brothers provincial governors or superintendents over the trea sury, horses &c. (I. 346-348). The Rājadharmakaustubha lays down a few additional propositions: (1) even if the eldest does not succeed owing to some mental or physical defect, his son's right will remain intact and R. D. K. quotes the words of the fisherman chief to Bhisma in Ādi. 100. 92.55 The Bālambhatti on Yāj. I. 309 and Rājanitiprakāśa p. 40 say the same. Another example is that of Anśumān who became king when his father Asamañja was exiled from the state by Sagara for his misdeeds. (2) When a younger son is crowned king because the eldest is disqualified, then after the former's death his son succeeds and not the son of the disqualified eldest son who is born after the coronation of the younger (e. g. Yudhisthira deserved the kingdom on Pandu's death and not Duryodhana ). The Nitivā. kyāmrta ( sec. 24 p. 249) lays down the order of succession in the case of kings as follows: the son, full brother, half-brother, uncle, a nale of the same family, daughter's son, a stranger (who is either elected or who takes up the kingdom 56). 

53. TITTAVITI\# ATTUTI 109. 25 quoted by trop wit. p. 235. 

54, sagtig fint: Si ning sport T IF 07411**** WITT TTECH Q1 . I. 343-344. 

55. arrari TT: HTUT ATTETIST 100. 92. 

56. Staromitgegera mung gagahora na 99 TIET! I 

W OTT ( CTFOTO) p. 249. 



[ Vol. 

Sometimes a king selected a younger son to succeed him, There are famous historical examples. The great Gupta Emperor Samudragupta though a younger son was nominated by his father Chandragupta I to succeed and by his brilliant and most successful career Samudragupta more than justified the choice. Vide the Allahabad Pillar Inscription verse 4 (Gupta Inscrip tions p. 6). Similarly Chandragupta II, though younger, was nominated by his father Samudragupta to succeed himself, Yayāti selected his youngest son Pūru because he was devoted and obedient and the eldest and other sons disobeyed him. Vide Adiparva chap. 75 ff. and above p. 42. The principle of hereditary succession was so strong that even a boy king was placed on the throne. Vide Raghu. XVIII, 39. 

In almost all works on rājaśāstra there is a disquisition on the qualities that a good king should possess. Vide Kaut. VI. 1, Manu VII. 32-44, Yāj. I. 309-311 and 334, Saṅkha-Likhita 

quoted in R. D. K. III. p. 14 and Rājaniti-prakāśa p. 116, Santi 57. 12 ff. and 70, Kam. I. 21-22, IV. 6-24, XV. 31, Māna Bollāsa II. 1.1-9 (p. 29), Sukra I. 73-86, Viṣṇudharmottara II. 3, Only one or two passages can be set out here. Yāj. (I. 309-311 and 334) states 'a king should have great energy, should be generous, mindful of past (good or bad) turns done by others, dependent on those who are advanced (in austerities, knowledge and experience), possessed of a disciplined mind, endowed with an even temper (in good or bad luck), born of a noble family (on both sides), truthful, pure (in body and mind), prompt in action, of strong memory, not mean-minded, not harsh (in words or acts), observant of the rules of dharma (as to varṇas and aśramas), free from vices, talented, brave, clever in concealing secrets (or acc. to Bhāruchi and Aparārka 'clever in scenting the secrets of his enemies'), guarding the weak points of his state, well-taught as regards logic, the science of govern ment, the science of wealth and the three vedas. He should be forbearing towards brāhmaṇas, straightforward towards his friends, wrathful towards his enemies, and should be (kind) like a father towards his servants and subjects'. Manu VII. 32 is very similar to Yāj. I. 334. The Mit. says that the qualities specified in Yāj. I. 309-311 are antaranga (inward or more essen tial). The 2nd quality 'sthūla-lakṣa' occurs also in the inscrip tion of Rudradāman (E. I. vol. VIII. at p. 44). From I. 312 Yaj. states the bahiranga qualities viz. selection of ministers, purohita and sacrificial priests, gifts to worthy brāhmaṇas, protection &c. 

III ) 

Qualities required in a king 

Kautilya VI. 1 contains several lists of the king's qualities from several points of view. First, there is a list of qualities that make the king win the heart of the people (or make him approa chable) viz, being of a noble family, godly, spirited, consulting the aged, virtuous, truthful, not failing in his promises, grateful, taking broad views (not pusillanimous), highly enthusiastic, not given to procrastination, powerful enough to control his feudatories, firm in mind, having a council of ministers of no mean calibre, desirous of self-discipline. These are called 'ābhi gāmika-gunas' which word occurs in the Palitana plates of Dharagena II (of Valabhi) in E.I. vol. XI p. 83 and in the Māliya plate of the same king (Gupta Ins. pp. 164, 169 ). The Dasakumāra carita VII appears to make a pointed reference to this list when it makes a character say that the king (there referred to ) has in him all the qualities beginning from good family (sarvai. vātma-sampad-abhijanāt-prabhrti &c.) Then the intelleotual qualities he should possess are: desire to learn, study, under standing of what is studied and retaining it, reflection, discus sion and devotion to the principles accepted after discussion, Almost the same qualities of the intellect( dhi) are mentioned by Kām. IV, 22. The word 'sakyasāmanta'(in Kaut, VI. 1) occurs also in Agnipurāṇa 239. 4. The qualities that are the different aspects of his enthusiasm (or energy ) are: valour, non-endurance (of the might of others), quickness (of action) and assiduity. The same occur in Kām. IV. 23. Then follows a long list of quali ties that go to make up the personal endowment of the king (atma-sampat). Gaut. (XI. 2, 4-6) requires that the king should 

do what is right (acc. to śāstras ) and speak (or decide) rightly, should be pure (at heart and externally), should control his senses, be possessed of qualified servants and endowed with knowledge of the means of policy, should be even-handed towards all his subjects and look after their welfare. The long list of Saṅkha-likhita agrees more or less with those of Kautilya and Yaj. Santiparva 70 states that the king should possess 36 quali ties, viz. he should not speak bitterly, he should be godly, not wicked, not haughty, of agreeable address &c. Kām. I. 21-22 mentions 19 qualities that lead to the well-equipped personality of the king (ātma-sampat), viz. study of sāstra (Dandaniti), intellect, serenity, cleverness, boldness, power of comprehension, energy, eloquence, firmness, capacity to endure the worries of adversities, majesty, purity, kindness, liberality, truthfulness, gratefulness, noble family, character, self-restraint. Then Kām. jo IV. 15-19 sets out the qualities called ātma-sampat, which 

46 

· History of Dharmasastra 

( Vol. 

generally agree with Kautilya's enumeration (in VI. 1). Acc. to Kām. IV. 24 liberality, truthfulness and valour are the three greatest qualities in a king, who, when endowed with these, aoquires all other qualities. The Managollāsa (II. 1. 2-7) first enumerates 44 qualities such as truthfulness, spiritedness (which agree more or less with Kautilya's enumeration) and then states that the five most essential qualities in a king are truthfulness, valour, forbearance, liberality and capacity to appreciate the worth of others. The Agnipurāṇa (239. 2-5) enumerates 21 qualities such as noble family, character &c. In the Parasurama pratāpa 96 qualities are enumerated in the Rajavallabhakanda (Ms. 239 of Viśrāmabāg collection II, folio 21b). The Sabhāparva 5. 107-109 and Rāmāyaṇa II. 100.65-67 require the king to avoid 14 faults viz. atheism, falsehood, hot temper, carelessness, pro crastination, not seeing the wise, laziness, addiction to five pleasures of sense, considering state matters alone (without mantrins ), taking counsel with those who do not know politics, not starting to do what is decided upon, not guarding secret royal policy, not practising auspicious acts, taking up under takings on all sides at one and the same time. Vanaparva 251. 5 says that subjects do not like a king who is very timid, very weak, procrastinating, careless and immersed in pleasures on account of vices. Sabhā 5. 125 states that sleep (by day), lazi ness, timidity, hot tempor, softness and dilatoriness are six calamities in a king. 

The works on dharmaśāstra and arthaśāstra devote a good deal of space to the education of the king and to his moral dis cipline. Gaut. XI. 3 requires that the king should have received instruction in Trayı ( the three Vedas ) and Anvikṣikl. This last has been differently interpreted by different writers. Kaut. I. 2 says that Antīkṣiki comprehends Sāṅkhya, 57 Yoga and Loka 

57. miei aint alates marinerii ... Ti durataTOTT लोकस्योपकरोति व्यसनेम्युदये च बुद्धिमवस्थापयति प्रज्ञावाक्पक्रियावैशारचं करोति । प्रदीपः सर्वविधानामुपायः सर्वकर्मणाम् । आश्रयः सर्वधर्माणां शश्वदाम्पीक्षिकी मता ॥ अर्थ STU I, 2. This last verse occurs in TTTT\#T&T on TITU I. 1. 1, where the 4th pāda is agget straat. Some read ret (Jolly's ed. of stusre) but are not seems to be more grammatical and to be the reading of most classical works. The Trivandrum ed. reads \#refirerit. Pataljali in his Mahābhāṣya bas a sentence 7011 wilt witFTOFT (Bhāguri expounds the Lokayata system ), vol. III p. 325 on Panini VII. 3. 45. Later on Lokāyata came to be identified with atheistic views that denied the existence of a soul or the next world. Śhaṅkara on Vedāntasūtra II. 2. 1 and 

(Continued on the next page). 

DI) 

Education of the king 

yata and that it examines the relative strength of the three other vidyās with reasons, and thereby benefits the world, steadies the mind in calamities and prosperity and imparts excellence in intellect, speech and actions. It is always the torch of ( sheds light on) all vidyās, it is the means of (inducing to go in for ) all undertakings, it is the source of all dharmas. Kautilya derives the name from the root 'iks' with 'anu' and he takes it to mean the science of ratiocination. It is somewhat strange that Lokāyata is included in Anvikṣikl, one of the subjects of study for the prince. But it appears from the remarks he makes that Kauṭ, uses it only in the sense of logic based on premises derived from ordinary experience (loka) though in later literature Lokayata came to mean 'nāstika' (atheist, materialist). Acc. ** 

(Continued from last page) III. 3. 53 and 54 states that the Laukāyatikas held the view that conscious ness is a quality of the body (and there is no soul over and above the body). The Tantravārtika runs them down as fools and apes (on Jaimini 1. 3.3). In the Rāmāyana Rāma asks Bharata not to resort to Lokāyatika brāhmanas, who, though childish, look upon tbemselves as learned and who relying on the knowledge acquired by Anvikșiki speak nonsense in spite of the fact that there are principal Dharmaśāstras ( that point out the sensible path ). लोकापतिकान मारतात सेबसे । अनर्धकुशला ते पाला। पण्डिसमानिमः ॥ धर्मशानेषु मुख्यषु विद्यमानेषु दुधाः । बुद्धिमाम्बीक्षिकी प्राप्य निरर्थे प्रवदन्ति ते ॥ अयोध्याकाण्ड 100. 38–39. The Kāmasūtra (1. 2. 30 ) says that the Laukāyatikas hold that a kārsāpaṇa (copper coin) which one is certain of is better than a niṣka (a gold coin) which is doubtful. * Fiat archite: Freigo pia mlar T: FIAT 1. 2. 30. Rajasekhara in his Kāvyamimānsā p. 37 (Gaekwad's O. series, ed. of 1934 ) refers to the opinion of the Laukāyatika logicians that the consciousness in human beings arises from the bhutas (elements) just as the power of intoxication (in wine) is due to the mixture of several ingredients (none of which may by itself be intoxicating). The Nitivākyāmsta p. 76 remarks " the Lokāyatika view leads to the effectuation of worldly affairs, for the king is able to uproot the thorns of the country by the help of Lokāyata", 016FITEETTATUAgi harf i mergaire 

TST (508712 ani mifarat. p. 76. Vide J. R. A. S. for 1917 p. 175 n. 2, article on tuy in J.A.O.S. 1930 p. 132 ff., H. Dh, vol. II p. 359 n.; * Historical Notices of the Lokāyatas' in the Silver Jubilee vol, of the B. O. R. Institute, Poona pp. 386-397. 

58. mr \#ARTIST foreg07T Garagri fan on 9. I. 306 : भाग्वीक्षिक्या सर्कशावान्तामतिष्ठितम् ।तुक्रमीति. I. 153 आम्धीक्षिकी वाचविन्द्रा sharoitat marerar i raritats p. 118. The word approfiter is derived as safy ras () : Fra srafierit aco, to gioia V.1.109. Wiat on waren explains THTATTATIEF THA THT FT 

UTST PEUT:', while for on por pay I. 1. 

1 9 qm fr भन्सा उसपन समितिका सेपमापीक्षिकी यापतकाविशयापिम्पपलियते।. Vide oftware on the 319.28 for a similar derivation. 



(Vol. 

to the Amarakośa, Viśvarūpa on Yāj. I. 306, Haradatta on Gaut. (XI. 3), Aparārka and several others Ānyikṣiki means 'Logic'. Acc. to Kām. II. 7 and 11, the Mit. on Yaj. I. 311, Sukraniti I 158 it means 'Atmavidya' (Metaphysics), while Sukraniti I. 153 and Rājaniti-prakāśa p. 118 combine the two by saying that it is logic that leads on to or is useful for acquiring knowledge of the Self. The Nitimayūkha (p. 34) includes logic and Vedānta in Anvikṣiki and Mimānsā and smrtis under Trayi. The Bārhaspatyasūtra (II. 5-6) advises the king to follow the Laukāyatika doctrines at the time of securing artha (wealth ) and the Kāpālika-sāstra in achieving his sexual and similar desires. 59 

Great divergence of views prevailed as to the vidyās that were essential for the education of the king. According to the Manusmrti VII. 43, Santi, 59.33, Kauṭ. I. 2, Yāj. I. 311, Kām. II. %, Sukraniti I. 152, Agni. 238.8, the subjects for the king's education are four viz., Anyikṣiki, Trayi, Vārtā and Dandaniti. Kaut. notes that the school of the Mānavas held the view that the vidyās were three and regarded Anvikṣiki as a special branch of Trayi; that the Bārhaspatya school was of opinion that they were only two, Vārtā and Dandaniti, since Trayi only acted as a screen ( to obscure the intellect) of one (the king ) who wants to know the ways of the world; and the Auśanagas regard ed Daṇdaniti as the only vidyā for a king, since according to them, the efforts to learn all vidyās are tied down to it (i. e. are ultimately intended to lead on to the mastery of Dandaniti). It will be seen how the Auśanasas and Bārhaspatyas had an entirely secular view in the science of government and divorced it from the study of sacred books and metaphysics in the case of the king. The Dasakumiracarita VIII (that displays a deep study of Kautilya) says that the vidyās for the king are four (catasro rajavidyās-traylvārtānvikṣikıdandanitiḥ ). The Bārhas patyasūtrs I. 3 (Dandanstireva vidya) holds that Dandaniti is the only (essential) vidyā for the king. Kautilya further explains that dharma and its opposite are learnt from the three Vedas, viz. Sāmaveda, Rgveda and Yajurveda, that the Atharvaveda and Itihāsaveda (i.e. Itihasa and Purāṇa ) are the other Vedas and that the six Angas also (viz. phonetics, ritual, grammar, etymology, metrics and astronomy) are comprehend 

. . 59. Hafur starfa 

TEETTO II, 5-6. 

fredEN 

I 

197 permite 

laeruhi 

inj 

Education of the king 

ed in the word “Tray180°. Sukraniti I. 155 says that the 14 vidyas ( enumerated in Yāj. I. 3) are comprehended in Trayi. Gaut. XI. 19 expressly says that in doing his duty of making the people observe the rules of the sacred codes the king would have to rely on the Veda, Dharmaśāstras, the Angas, Upavedas and Purāṇa. In the Rāmāyaṇa, Rāma and his brothers are often spoken of as proficient in the Vedas, Vedāngas, in Dhanurveda, Gandharvaveda, Rājavidya &c. (I. 18. 24 and 26, II. 1.20, II. 2. 34-35, V. 35. 13-14). In the Vanaparva 277. 4 it is said that the princes were proficient in the Vedas with their secret doctrine and in Dhanurveda. In the Adiparva 221. 72-74 Abhimanyu is said to have learned from Arjuna before he became 16 the Dhanurveda in four sections, the knowledge of astras, and the theory and practice of these. Vide also Anusagana 104. 146-147. Khāravela in his Hathigumpha Inscription (E. I. vol. XX. p. 79 11.2 and 5) states that he learnt Lekha (official correspondence), Rūpa (currency ), Ganana ( Accountancy) and the admini stration of justice, when he was the crown prince and also Gandharvaveda (music). In the Junagadh Inscription of Rudradaman (E. I. vol. VIII at page 44) the Mahaksatrapa is said to have attained great fame by his deep study, retention, and actual practice of grammar, artha ( either lexicography or politics ), music, logic and other vidyas and to have been a fine rider of horses, elephants, chariots and a great adept in wielding the sword and shield and in wrestling. The personal attain ments of Samudragupta (in Gupta Inscriptions No. 1 pp. 12, 15-16 ) show how thorough the education of at least some princos was or at least what the ideal about their education was. Vide H. Dh. vol. II. p. 364 for the education of princes and Dr. Beni 

60. TYAT YURI unui regrerat quafi ...... Arropa शुदायी। अथर्ववेदेतिहासवेदो च वेदाः । शिक्षा कल्पो ग्याकरण निर छन्दो ज्योतिष fara fra HOME 1. 2 and 3. In the Raghuvamsa XVIII. 50 Kālldāsa speaks of only three princely vidyās and Malllaatha quotes the very words of wirect cited bere and also Kām. II met mof quofifahari ng paraat: 1 प्रया एंव विभागो येन सान्धीक्षिकी मता ॥. It should be noted that the Samaveda Is here mentioned first. Probably Kautilya was a student of that Veda. Ia the Brahmanas and Upaniśade Rgveda comes Erst in the edumeration. Iti. bāsa and Purīna are called the Afth Veda ia Chandogya yfi. 1. 2. Compare Agnipurāṇa 238, 9 for words similar to saiu T your ato. 

01. tarumberarterat frarat halat TOTEUTU 

AT TITUATATU ...... (broken) wartun tur &o. E. I. vol. VIII P. 44 1. 13. 



(Vol. 

Prasad's Theory of Government in Ancient India' p. 218 for an ideal course of education for a prince quoted from the Buddhist work, Sūtrālankāra of Aśvaghoṣa. The Nitivakyāmsta" adds a long list of the accomplishments which a prince should possess viz, all scripts, valuing of jewels, knowledge of arms &c. On reading the ideal courses prescribed for the education of the prince by ancient Indian writers one cannot help feeling that they were probably actuated by the same sentiments that are attributed to Socrates by Plato in his ' Republic' (tr. by Jowett, ed. of 1875, vol. III. p. 357) viz. 'Until philosophers are kings or the kings and princes of this world have the spirit and power of philosophy and political greatness and wisdom meet in one and these commoner natures who follow either to the exclu sion of the other are compelled to stand aside, cities will never cease from ill-no, nor the human race as I believe-and then only will our State have a possibility of light and behold the light of day &o.' The Agnipurāṇa (225. 1-4) prescribes that the prince should be taught dharmaśāstra, kāmaśāstra, arthaśāstra, science of archery (dhanurveda ), the various arts and crafts by trusted teachers, that he should not be allowed to be associated with those who are angry with the king or disrespected by him or who are greedy and that if it is impossible to impart good qualities to him he should be confined, surrounded by pleasures. The princes were sometimes educated in their own capital or in a nearby college. Vide H. Dh. vol. II. p. 364. Sometimes, it appears, princes went to such famous seats of learning as Takṣasila (vide Jatakas ed. by Fausböll I. 87, 278, 319, 323, 400, III. 158, 168, 415, 463). The subjects of study there were the three vedas and 18 silpāni or vidyās (Jātakas, vol. II. 87, III. 115 ). Kautilya (1. 4) explains that Vārtā is constituted by agricul ture, the rearing of cattle and trade; it benefits ( the State) by bringing in grain, cattle, gold, baser metals, and free labour; by means of vārts the king secures treasury and army whereby he brings under control his own side and the enemy. In the Sabhaparva 6 5.79 and Ayodhyākānda 100. 47 it is declared 

.6. Parimi 1979: 1994: Avis ferrag qimma Topaut heama mature \#intuitionare si atten. D. 161. 

63. ratat eraman nito awiwall T. 5. 79, vor 100. 47; quar esforoarfitt att ta tiarapot: papar et po w ale atafor: \# Tante 150: 303 

lutera T \# stofn 68, 35; air mata att Traianne 

T263. 8; amarret fruf: 79T: 1 TFT NU un praiaT: MAR: 99997 4 7. . 93, 

III ) 

Importance of vārtā 

that when the world relies on vārtā it easily prospers. The Santi-parva ( 263.3) gives the warning that this world would cease to exist if vārtā was given up, that this world is rooted in vārtā and is sustained by the three vedas (68.35 ). The Vanaparva (150.30) states that the whole world is sustained by vārtā i.e. by merchandise, mines, trade, agriculture and tending cows, she-goats and ewes. The Nitivakyāmsta (p. 93 ) after defining vārtā es above emphasizes that the king secures the abundance of everything when vārtā is prosperous and that the man who has his own agriculture, milch-cattle, plot for growing vegetables and a well in his own house has indeed all the pleasures of this world. These quotations indicate what importance was attached to agriculture and the economic structure of society. The result is that in the Arthaśāstra economic matters occupy a very large space. 

Kautilya (1.5) starts by saying that the three vidyās (except daṇdaniti) in the case of the prince depend upon danda, that daṇda in its turn is based upon discipline, which is of two kinds, natural and induced (or acquired). Vidyās produce discipline (of the 2nd kind) in him who possesses the qualities of intellect specified above. Then he goes on to say that the prince should learn the alphabet and arithmetic after his caula is performed (in the 3rd year or later) and after upanayana ho should learn the three vedas and anvikṣikl from the sistas ( those learned in the veda), vārta from the heads or superin tendents ( of the various departments thereof) and dandanfti from expounders ( of the vidyā) and from practical politicians. Vide Manu VII. 43 ( =Matsya 215. 54 and Agni 225. 21-22 ) for directions as to from whom the prince was to learn the four vidyās. Kautilya prescribes that the prince should study these up to the 16th year, should then marry and that in order to foster the growth of the discipline of the intellect he should always associate with those who are advanced in the vidyās enumerated above (after his 16th year) and that the king should spend the first part of the day in practising the riding of elephants, horses, chariots and in the science of arms and the latter part of the day in listening to Itihasa which comprises Purana, history, stories, panegyrics, dharmasastra and artha śāstra. A king whose intellect is thus disciplined and who is devoted to disciplining his subjects also and to doing good to all will be the sole ruler of the earth. The Nitivākyāmsta (p. 162 ) defines vinaya as acting with humility towards those52 



[Vol. 

who excel in vratas, vidyas and are aged.' Manu VII. 38-39. Kam. I. 19-20 and 59-63, Sukra I. 92-93 (taken from Kām. I. 19-20 ) extol the value and importance of vinaya and waiting upon the aged and the learned. Manu (VII. 40-42 ) states that many kings perished with their vast paraphernalia through want of digcipline while others, though residing in a forest (i.e. without an army &c.), gained kingdoms through vinaya, and names Vena, Nahusa, Sudās son of Pijavana and Sumukha Nimi as those who perished through lack of vinaya and gives Pșthu and Manu as examples of those who secured kingdoms through vinaya. Matsya 215,53 is the same as Manu VII. 40. Ancient Indian writers harp on the education of the prince so much because their ideal of kingship was that the king should be a rājar ṣi (a royal sage). Kalidasa frequently speaks of this e. g. in Śākuntala II. 14 and Raghuvansa (I. 58). They were aware, like Socrates, that until either philosophers became®4 kings or kings philosophers States will never succeed in remedying their short-comings ( vide p. 50 above). Not only was an extensive course of intellectual training prescribed for the king, but both dharmaśāstra and arthagāstra works strongly and frequently Insist upon the necessity of moral discipline and the right direct ion of the emotions and will in the case of the king. 

Kautilya (1.6) emphasizes that control of the organs of sense is the cause of (proficiency in) vidyās and discipline should be attempted by giving up the six enemical tendencies viz, lust, hot temper, greed, vanity (māna), haughtiness or insolence (mada ), overjoy. He says that (the whole purpose or insistence of ) all śāstras is the restraint of the senses, that even a supreme ruler of the whole earth up to its four borders whose senses are not under control will at once perish and cites two examples on each of these six tendencies, viz. Dāndakya Bhoja who attempted to rape a brāhmana girl through lust and perished with his kingdom and kinsmen and Karala king of Videha; Janamojaya (perished) who attacked brāhmaṇas through hot tempor and Tālajangha who did so against the Bhrgus; Aila who exacted through greed excessive taxes from poroons of the four varṇas and Ajabindu, the king of Sauvira ; Ravana who did not restore another's wife through his conceit and Duryodhana who did not give even a part from his kingdom; Dambhodbhava who, despised all beings through his insolence and 

64. The word 'philosopher' used by Plato has got the narrow mean -ing of modern times.' 

HI 1 

Evil tendencies among kings 

53 

Arjuna of the Haihaya dynasty ; Vātāpi through overjoy when he attacked Agastya and also the oligarchy of the Vrspis when they attacked Dvaipāyana. Theso xix evil tendencies are called śatru-sad-varga or ari-sadvarga. Kautilya adds that by the conquest of these six evil tendencies Jāmadagnya (Parasurama) and Ambarisa enjoyed the earth for a long time. Kām. (I. 55 58) and Sukra. I. 144-146 give six of the twelve examples of Kaut, and Kām. I. 58 is the same as the last verse of Kautilya I. 6. Vide Mārkandeya 27. 12-13. In the Vasavadattā of Subandhu (Hall's od. pp. 273-276) there is a long list of the kings of antiquity (Purūravas, Nahusa, Yayāti, Sudyumna, Nala and nine others) who suffered owing to some failing or other in themselves. The Udyogaparva (74. 13-18) mentions by name 18 kings who by their evil career destroyed themselves, their friends and relatives (such as Mudāvarta of the Haihayas, Janamejaya of the Nipas, Bahula of Tālajanghas, Dhautamūlaka of the Cinas). This shows that Cina does not probably stand for modern China in the epic. Manu VII. 44 (=Matsya 215.55 ) also emphasizes the necessity for the king incessantly to curb the senges and not to fall a prey to vices arising from kāma and krodha. Manu (VII. 45-48) enumerates ten vicious tendencies due to kāma (desire for pleasures ) viz. hunting, gambling, sleep by day, finding fault (with others), women, drunkenness, (excessive indulgence in) dancing, singing and instrumental music, and aimless wandering; and eight vicious tendencies due to krodha (hot temper) viz. tale-bearing, violence, treachery, envy, slander, (improper) seizure of property, reviling and assault. Manu further declares (VII. 50) that among the vices due to kāma, drinking wine, gambling, women and hunting are the most harmful, each preceding one being worse than each succeeding 

ht 

65. Most of these stories occur in the Mahabharata, Purāgas, and Buddhist works. Vide Jolly's ed, of the Kautiliya vol. II, p. 5. But the story of the Vrsnis and Dvaipāyana is not known. For Janamejaya (different from the descendant of Arjuna, the Pandava ) incurring tbe sio of brābmana killing, vide Sānti 150. 3. For Arjuna (called Kārtavīrya) king of Haihayas, vide Sabbāparva 22. 24, Vanaparva 115. 12, Aousā sada 153. 3 ff, Santi 49.35 ff. and Āśvamedhikaparva 29, Matsyapurāṇa 43, Vāyu 94. For Agastya and Vātāpi vide Vanaparva 96. In the Mārkandeya the instances of kings that came to grief through kāma, krodha, lobha &c. are different except that of Aila (chap. 27, 14-17). For Dambhodbhava vide Sabhā 22. 24 and Udyoga 96. 7 (cr. ed. 94, 7). For the story of Danda who raped a maiden of the Burgu family vide Rāmāyaṇa VII, 80-81, Dāndakya Bhoja is men tioned ( along with Rāvana and Kicaka) by the Kāmasūtra 1, 2. 44-45, 

54 



[ Vol. 

one and ( VII. 52) that among the vices due to hot temper, caus ing physical injury, reviling and deprivation of wealth are the worst. Manu (VII. 52) has a sly hit that these seven vices are more or less prevalent among kings (sarvatraivānuṣanginah) and therefore the only choice is that of the lesser or least of evils Kautilya (VII. 3) has a lengthy disquisition on the views of his predecessors about the relative harmfulness of the three vices due to hot temper and of the four due to kāma and states his own opinion that arthadūṣana meaning loss of the means of livelihood by gifts, exactions (by the king), loss or abandonment of pro perty is more harmful than reviling and dandapāruṣya is more harmful than arthadūṣana. He points out the benefits derived from hunting viz. exercise, the disappearance of phlegm, bile. fat and sweat, the acquisition of skill in aiming at stationary and moving bodies, the ascertainment of the minds of beasts when 

they are provoked and occasional travel.66 These are echoed, almost in the same words by Kām. XIV. 25 and in the Sakuntala (II. 25 ) by Kalidāsa. Vide Sabhā 68. 20, Udyoga 33.92 for the seven principal vices. Kām. (XIV. 6 and 7) enumerates the three vices of hot temper and the four of kama and holds an elaborate discussion on their respective demerits. He defines arthadūṣana (XIV, 17) somewhat differently (viz. as the aban doning of an important object or of great wealth in order to show that what really merits blame is not so). Vide the Viṣṇudharmot tara II.65.12-15 for the two meanings of arthadūṣana67. Kām, does not agree that hunting has many good points in its favour and advises the king to prepare a separate well-guarded hunting ground of one-half yojana in length and breadth if he really desires to hunt ( XIV. 28-42). The Mānasollāsa (vol. II) in the 15th chapter of the 4th vimśati deals with hunting as a sport for kings and points out how a forest is to be preserved for royal hunting and how it is to be guarded and enumerates 31 methods of hunting. Kām, warns the king who wants to retain 

66, मृगयायां तु व्यायामः श्लेष्मपित्तभेदस्वेदनाशनले स्थिरेच काये लक्षपरिचयः orura ne aggior parteTaEuropa i mireu VIII. 3; FONT STATES ग्यायाम आममेदकपक्षयः । चरस्थिरेषु लक्षेषु वाणसिद्धियसमा ॥ मगयायो गुणाने arang \#TAT I ator: ATTENT: AN TH ARE \# . XIV. 25-26. The reading m atur in some M88, of the Kauṭiliya is preferable in view of Kalidāsa's words pret m ati. 

67. Vide the foregwiera (II, 65.12-15) groei tra format forest te u putut carotas aut rete grupo Arorat het goeftet FART अर्धामा दूषणं प्रोक्त विप्रकीर्णत्वमेव च । अदेशकाले यदाममपात्रे दानमेव।। अयस्त दूषणं 

III) 

Gambling, the worst vice 

his kingdom against fondness for women (XIV. 57-58). He further says that a king may even indulge in fondness for women and may even drink moderately, but he must totally avoid gambling and hunting (XIV. 65). Kautilya regards gambling as the worst of the vices for a king (VIII. 3 last sentence in prose). In the Daśakumāracarita (VIII) there is an elaborate (but ironical) description of the mental and other benefits derived from the four principal vices due to kāma. Kām. I. 54 states that hunting, gambling and wine in the case of kings must be condemned, since calamities befell Pāndu, Nala and the Vrsnis (respectively ) by being addicted to these. Even an ideal king like Rama was fond of hunting. Sukra (I. 332-333) points out that hunting has much in its favour, but there is one great defect in it viz. slaughter of animals. Sukra (I. 109-119 ) denounces gambling, drinking and fondness for women as the worst of vices and points out that Indra, Dandakya, Nahuṣa and Rāvana came to grief through their passion for women (1. 114) and that a king who is excessively fond of dancers, singers, courtesans, wrestlers, eunuchs and men of low birth falls an easy prey to his enemies (I. 128 ). Kām. (I. 40-46, which are almost the same as Sukra I. 102-107) gives a poetic description of how animals like the deer, the elephant, the moth, the fish and the bee meet death or become confined by extreme attach ment to one only out of the five objects of sense and emphasizes that man who can and does enjoy all the pleasures of the five senses must practise great restraint. 
