+++
title = "Preface"

+++

PREFACE 

deals win in the and pavlora os 

Tho third volume of the 11istory of Dharma istra vys published in October 1946. In thc brios presocr to that saiunin I intimated that the remaining topics of Dharmajstra soujd be dealt with in ono volume. But ne 1 proccoded with the laski ) found that that was a mjecalcnlntion. To present in cur volung all the topics that remained in the manner and on the scale that I had adopted in the first three yolumes you found to be impossible. Besides, as nis ngo advanced, I could not maintain the samne snced and finiālı the whole history in a few years as I intiinated I would do in tho profica to the third Yolumo. Thorefore, I had to dccide, however tolucantly, in spread the remaining work over two volumea, Oving in the scarcity of paper and paucity of skilled workers, the volume has been in the press for more than three ycars This roluinn deals with eight topics, riz Pātako, Prāfoscitta, Kormaripala, Antyesti, Āśauca, Suddhi, Sraddlia and Tirthnyātrā. These subjects are of great interest to anthropologists. There was great temptation for me, when dealing with these topics, lo indulge in dwelling upon similar beliera, usages and rites des cribed in such works as Frazer's 'Golden Bough,' For two reasons, however, I have rarely succumbed to this temptation, In the first place, thioro was the fear of increasing the bulk of tho work which has already assuined onormous proportions, In the second place, dwolling on comparisons of ancient and medieval Indian usages and rites with similar usages and rites found elsesphere is liable to serious misunderstanding, Frazer's volumes are largely made up of materials concerning the beliefs, usages and rites of very primitive people. It appeared to me that readers of such comparisons might be led to think that people in ancient and medioyal India were at a primitive stage of culture, while as a matter of fact they had a very high culture in most mattors, although they rotained certain beliefs and usages derived from remote antiquity. Many cultured societies retain some usages that belong to periods of antiquity. The queen in France was not to leave for a whole year the room in which the death of her consort was announced to her. Wretched old women deemed to be witches were pro secuted and sentenced to death in-England up to the beginning 

History of Dhiar maśūsira 

of the eighteenth century, while Manu (IX. 290) more than two thousand yoars ago prescribed the mild punishmont of a fine of two hundred panas for all incantations intended to destroy lifo, for magic rites and for raising ghosts and goblins. My main aim has throughout beon to discovor, colloct, classify and interpret the facts of the various departmonts of Dharmaśāstra and my endeavour has beon, as far as in me lies, to present the truth with detachment and intellectual integrity and without bias (except what might have been unconsciously engendered in my mind owing to my being born and brought up in a brahmana family ) to show the continuity, the dovelopments and transformations in Indian beliefs, rites and usages throughout the ages and, wbilo bringing the past in its caugal relations with the presont, to indicato and suggest future trends and changes in those matters, f 

The fifth and last volumo will mainly deal with the following subjects vratas and utsayas, śānti rites, kāla and muhurta; paurāna-dharma, the influence of the Pūrvam māmgā and other śāstras on dharmaśāstra; the cosmological, religious and philosophical background of dharmaśāstra; the fundamental aspects of our culture through the ages; the impact of modern social and other ideas and trends on the dogmas and ideals of dharmaśāstra and the future of the latter This by itself is rather an ambitious programme. Now that I am over seventy-three years of age and suffering from several ailments I have mis givings whether I would be able to write this last volume and publish it while all mental and physical faculties are sound I ain myself extremely anxious to write this last volume as early as possible and bring to a conclusion an undertaking to which I have devoted all my leisure for over thirty years regardless of monetary losses and bodily ailments. With that object in view I have given up either entirely or very largely most of my other activities and engagements and have thereby offended many of my friends. 

This volume also is full of quotations, references to inscriptions and judicial decisions, The reasons for this have 

+ Prof. J. B Bury, a distinguished Professor of History in the Cambridge University, thought that freedom from bias was not possible abd was not also desirable, since a man writing history completely free from bias would produce a colourless and dull work Vide 'Selected Essays' (edited by Harold Temperley, 1930) p. 70 

Preface 

iii 

been stated at length in the preface to the second volume and therefore they need not be repeated here. The list of additions to this volume is much larger than in the preceding volumes. I may be pardoned for frankly stating the reason. The first and second volumes of the History of Dharmaśāstra were published so far back as 1930 and 1941 respectively. No second edition of these has yet been called. It seems to me quite possible that during my life-tiine no second edition of the volumes of the History, or at least of this volume, might appear, Therefore, I tried to incorporate by way of additions such in. formation as had escaped me while the work was being written in order to make it as complete as possible, 

I now discharge the pleasant duty of acknowledging my obligations to others Bloomfield's Vedic Concordance, the Vedic Index of Professors Macdonell and Keith, and the volumes of the Sacred Books of the East have been very useful in pre paring this volume as in the case of its predecessors. Parama hamsa Swami Keralananda Sarasvati of Wai has been a tower of strength in all matters of doubt and difficulty and has helped me by offering prompt guidance in solving some intricate problems. I am highly obliged to Mr. S. N. Sayadi of the Bhandarkar Oriental Institute, Poona, for help in the correction of proofs and to Mr. P. M. Purandare, Advocate (0, S.), Bombay High Court, and Tarkatirtha Raghunath Shastri Kokje of Lonavla for reading the printed sheets as they came and making valuable suggestions. 

2. A. N. Perof. G. BOR. R. N. 

It is difficult to name all those who in various ways, during the progress of this volume for over six years, kindly rendered assistance, but I should lika to make special mention of Prof. K V. Rangaswami Aiyangar, Mr. A. N, Krishna Aiyangar, Dr. A. S, Altekar, Dr. S K Belvalkar, Prof. G. H. Bhatt, Mr. Bhabatosh Bhattacharya, Mr. N. G. Chapekar, Dr. R. N. Dandekar, Mr. D. B Diskalkar, Dr. G. S Gai, Prof, P. K. Gode, Tarka-tīrtha Laksmapashastri Joshi, Mr, G, H, Khare, Pandit Balacharya Khuperkar, Dr. Umesha Mishra, Dr. V. Raghavan, Prof. L. Renou, Prof. H. D. Velankar. Thanks are due to these scholars and many others for help and interest in this volume. I am conscious that in spite of so much help and generous encouragement from friends there are in this volumo several mistakes, the sole responsibility for which rests on my shoulders. In a work replete with thousands of quotations and references 

History of Dharmaśāstra 

it is quite likely that many slips have escaped my attention. $ For these and for the elision of a few diacritical marks and the displacement of parts of Sanskrit letters in the process of printing the indulgence and forgiveness of all readers are sought. I sincerely thank the Manager of the Aryabhushan Press Poona, for carrying out the work of printing this volume with care in spite of difficulties caused by paper and labour shortage. 

BOMBAY, } 

10-10-1953) 

PV KANE 

$ I take this opportunity of correcling two mistahes that I regret I committed in the third solame of the History of Dharmasāstra. In note 1886 on p 968 (of vol III) I refer to a work of Mr Batul oath Bhattacharya that contaigs a full treatment of Kalivarjya, I suggested 10 tbat note that Mr, Bhattacharya probably retouched his thesis after 1937 though it was written in 1933, in view of the fact that he referred to the Smrtimuktāphala (which was published in 1937 by Mr Gbarpure) Through oversight I forgot that Mr. Bhattacharya had expressly stated that he used the transcript of a ms of the Sportimuktāphala specially made for him. Therefore, I was wrong in my surmise that he probably retouched his thesis and I must say that the thesis as publisbed in 1943 is the same as that written in 1933 for the Jogendrachandra Ghosc Research Prize The second mistake refers to Dr, U, N Ghosal on p 32 (of sol III) I stated 'it is not possible to hold as Jayaswal, U Ghosal and others do tbat the theory of social contract was the earlier one aod the theory of diviac right of kings sas later on propound ed by the Manusmrti to support tbe brābmana empire of Pusyamitra' IA Writing this sentence my memory was at fault I find that Dr. Ghosal does not hold the view that I attributed to bim. In the 'Indian Historical Quarterly' (vol 23, pp 68-70) Dr Ghosal justly protests against my bracketrag him with Jayasual, but I cannot help observing that the last sentence in the paper shows unexpecled accrbily In bis whole career as a writer Dr Ghosal was not probably guilty of a single slip and could not therefore briog bimself to belici e that may maustahe might bave beca bona fide.. .. 
