+++
title = "0"

+++

## Preface

PREFACE 

The second volume of the History of Dharmaśāstra was published in the third quarter of 1941. In the Preface to that volume I held forth hopes that the next volume dealing with the remaining subjects comprised in Dharmaśāstra might be placed before scholars in about three years thereafter. The Great War was then being fought in Europe and it was generally believed that India would remain free from the fear of actual invasion. But such fond hopes were shattered by the sudden attack on Pearl Harbour by Japanese bombers on 7th December 1941. Japan gained rapid and phenomenal victories and within about three months from the attack on Pearl Harbour vast territories from the Philippines to Burma fell into the hands of the victors. Calcutta and Trincomalee were bombed. Serious fears were entertained about an invasion of the mainland of India by land, sea and air. There was great panic in such coastal cities as Madras, Bombay and Karachi. The matters uppermost in the minds of Government officials and the members of the public were A. R. P. measures, the recruiting of men for the army, navy and air force and the removal of families and valuables to places of safety in the interior. Important and rare books froin the libraries of the Bombay Asiatic Society and of the Univer sity of Bombay were taken to distant places for reasons of security. During almost the whole of 1942 it was very difficult for me to work on the preparation of the third volume in the midst of a general atmosphere of panic caused by the fear of invasion and the removal of valuable reference books from Bombay. Owing to the war there has been great scarcity of paper and printing also has become very costly. I decided upon writing only on a few of the several subjects that remained to be dealt with and chose Rājadharma, Vyavahāra and Sadāoāra, the treatment of which is now placed before the public. Scarcity of paper and labour is responsible for the fact that this third volume has been in the press for nearly three years. The present volume increased in bulk beyond expectation. The fourth and last volume will deal with the following subjects: Pataka, karmavipāka and prāyascitta; antyeṣti, aśauca and śrāddha ; tirtha; vrata; kāla and muhurta, śānti; Paurana dharma; the influence of the Pūrvamīmārsā and other gāstras on dharma sastra; the religious and philosophical background of dharma sāstra; the essentials of our culture, its future, the coming 

History of Dharnuatastra 

social and other trends and their impact on the dogmas and ideals of Dharmasastra, I am personally anxious to finish all the remaining work as early as possible. But looking to my age (I am nearly 67 now ), to my ailments and to the number of subjects that remain to be dealt with, it is impossible for me to say when the next and last volume may be published. This volume also is full of quotations, refers to many inscriptions, judicial decisions and legislative enactments. The reasons for this have been stated at length in the Preface to the second volume and I do not desire to repeat them here. In the general index to the second volume full references to works like the Manusmrti were not given, because such works were quoted on almost every page. But some critics found fault with this ; therefore in the index to this volume full references to all works are inserted. 

All that now remains is the pleasant duty of acknowledg ing my obligations to others. Bloomfield's Vedic Concordance, the Vedic Index of Professors Macdonell and Keith and several volumes of the Sacred Books of the East have been very useful in preparing this volume as in the case of the preceding one. I wish to mention specially the debt I owe to the late Maha mahopādhyāya Kamalakṇṣṇa Smrtitirtha for his editorial work on twelve volumes on the different branches of dharmaśāstra, which have been of great use to me in writing all the volumes of my History viz. Hāralata, Vivā daratnākara, Gphastharatnā kara, Kṛtyaratnākara, Tirthacintā maṇi, Varṣakriyākaumudi, Danakriyākaumudi, Sraddhakriyakaumudi, Suddhikaumudi, Dandaviveka, Rājadharmakaustubha and Agastyasamhita. I am highly obliged to Paramahamsa Svāmi Kovalānanda Sarasvati of Wai for frequent help and guidance in solving some intricate problems of Dharmaśāstra, to Prof. N. A. Gore, M. A. of Poona for help in the careful correction of proofs, to Tarkatirtha Raghunathasāstri Kokje of Lonavla and Mr. N. G. Chapekar, B. A., LL. B. (retired F.C. Sub-judge ), of Badlapur for reading through the whole volume and suggesting some additions and corrections. 

Assistance in various ways during the progress of the work for the last four years was very kindly rendered by a host of "friends and acquaintances, among whom I should like to make special mention of Prof. H. D. Velankar, Dr. R. N. Dandekar, Dr. S. K. Belvalkar, Rao Bahadur Prof. Rangaswami Aiyangar, Dr. A. 8. Altekar, Mr.P. K. Gode, Dr. Raghavan, Mr. S. N. Joshi of Bharata-itihasa-samsodhaka-mandala at Poona, Mr. Bhabatosh 

Preface 

Bhattacharya (son of M. M. Kamalakrśṇa Smṛtitirtha ), Mr. S. L. Katre of Ujjain, Prof. A. M. Paramasivanandan of Pacchaiappa College at Madras, the late Pandit Rangacarya Raddi. Thanks are due to all these and many others for help and interest in this volume. It need not be expressly stated that I alone am responsible for the views and mistakes contained in this volume. I sincerely thank the Manager of the Aryabhushan Press, Poona, for carrying out the work of printing with care and promptitude in spite of difficulties caused by war conditions and paper and labour shortage. 

In a work bristling with thousands of quotations and references it is likely that many slips have escaped attention, The indulgence of the reader is sought for forgiveness in the matter of several misprints in the footnotes caused by loss or displacement of the parts of letters in the process of printing. 

BOMBAY, 2 1st October, 1946.) 

P. V. KANE

## Table of Contents

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

List of abbreviations 

xi-xvi Chronological Table 

... xvii-xx Brief Synopsis 

... xxi-xxiii List of works consulted ... 

... XXV-Xxxvi Table of cases cited ... 

... Xxxvii-xlii Additions and Corrections 

... xliii-xlv History of Dharmaśāstra 

1-973 Appendix containing long extracts in Sanskrit 

and List of names of officials 

975–1014 General Index 

... 1015-1082 Index of technical or important words 

1083-1088 

## List of Abbreviations

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS EMPLOYED 

A. I. R. = All India Reporter of Nagpur Ait. Br. Aitareya Brahmana All. = Indian Law Reports, Allahabad Series 

A. L. J. = Allahabad Law Journal Ap. = Āpastamba (generally the author of the Dharmasūtra 

is meant) Ap. Dh. S. = Apastamba-dharmasūtra Ap. M. P. Apastamba-mantra-pātha A. S. W. I. = Archaelogical survey of Western India Aśv. Gr. = Aśvalāyana-grhyasūtra Baud. Dh, S. = Baudhāyana-dharmasutra B. I. = Bibliotheca Indica series, Calcutta Bom. = I. L. Reports, Bombay Series Bom, G, = Bombay Gazetteer volumes Bom. H. C. R. = Bombay High Court Reports (vol. I-XII) Bom, L, R. = Bombay Law Reporter (edited by Ratanlal 

and Dhirajlal) B.O. R. I. 

Bhandarkar Oriental Research Insti B.O. R. Institute tute, Poona Bṛ, = Smrti of Bṛhaspati Br. Up. = Brhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad B. R. W. W. = Beal's Buddhist Records of the Western world Cal. = Indian Law Reports, Calcutta Series Catur, = Caturvimsatimata Chān. Up. = Chāndogya Upanigad 

Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum (vol. I C. I. I. or U relating to Inscriptions of the times of Asoka, Corpus I. I. vol. II relating to Kuṣaṇa Inscriptions and 

vol. III relating to Gupta Inscriptions ) O. L. J. = Calcutta Law Journal Com. = Commentary or Commentator (according to context) Cr. ed. = Oritical edition ( of the Mahabhārata, Poona) O. W. N. Calcutta Weekly Notes ( Law Reports ) D. B. = The Dāyabhāga of Jimūtavahana D.O. - Dattakaandrika 

History of Dharmaśāstra 

D.O. - Deccan College Collection(when mss. are concerned) Dh. S. = Dharmagūtra D. K. S. = Dāyakramasangraha of Srikrypa D. N. = Dattakamsmāmgā of Nandapandita E. C. = Epigraphia Carnatica E. I. = Epigraphia Indica F. B. = Full Bench ( decision ) 

i The Social organization in North-east India in Fick y = Buddha's time (translated from German by 

1 Dr. Shishirkumar Mitra, 1920 ) Gaut. = Gautama-dharmasātra Gr. R. = Gphastharatnakara of Candeśvara 

H. D. H. Dh.) 

= History of Dharmaśāstra 

Hir. gr. = Hiraṇyakeśi-gphya-sūtra 1. A. = Indian Antiquary 

Indian Appeals ( Law Reports). The context L will always indicate whether I, A. stands for the 

volumes of the Indian Antiquary or for the Law 

Reports, Indian Appeals 1. H.Q. = Indian Historical Quarterly I. L. R. = Indian Law Reports Ins. = Inscription or Inscriptions I. P. C. = Indian Penal Code Jai. = Jaimini's Pūrvamlmāmgāsātra J. A. O. S. Journal of the American Oriental Society J. A. S. B. = Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal J. B. O, R. S. * Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research 

Society J. R, A, S. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (London) Kām. Kamandakiya-niti-sāra Kāt. = Smrti of Kātyāyana reconstructed by P. V. Kane Kaut = Kautilya's Arthasāstra K. V. N. = Kalivarjyavinirṇaya (ms) L. R. I. A. = Law Reports, Indian Appeals (Privy Council) Mad. = Indian Law Reports, Madras Series Mārk. * Mārkandeyapurana Medh, Medhātithi, the oldest commentator of Manusmrti 

List of Abbreviations Employed 

Mit. = Mitakṣarā on the Yājñavalkya-smrti M. L. J. = Madras Law Journal Moo. I. A. = Moore's Indian Appeals ( Reports 

N. or n. = footnote Nār. = Nārada-smrti Nir. S. = Nirnayasindhu Nitisāra = Kamandaklya-niti-sāra N. I. A. = New Indian Antiquary, Poona Pan. = Pānini's Astādhyāyi Pār. Gș. = Pāraskara-gļhya-gūtra Par. M. = Parāśāra-Mādhaviya Patna = Indian Law Reports, Patna Series P. C. = Privy Council P.J. = Printed Judgments of the Bombay High Court Q. or q. = Quoted Raghu. = Raghuvamsa 

a ) Rājadharnakāṇda of Kalpataru ( on p. 43 Rāja Dh. K 

>= R. D. K. by mistake stands for Rājadharma-- 

kaustubha) Rajadharma-K. = Rājadharmakaustubha of Anantadeva Rāja N. P., Rājanitiprakāśa (a part of the Viramitrodaya R. N. P. I of Mitramiśra ) Rājat. Rājatarangiṇi Rg. = Rgveda Sam. K. = Samskāra-kaustubha Sam. Pr. = Samskāraprakasa ( a part of the Viramitrodaya 

of Mitramiśra ) Śān. Gr. = śānkhāyana-gļhya-sūtra Sat. Br. = Satapatha-brāhmaṇa S. B, E. = Sacred Books of the East (series edited by Max 

Müller ) 8. 1. 1. = South Indian Inscriptions Sm. C. = Smsticandrika Sm. Kau. Smrti-kaustubha Sm. M. == Smftimuktāphala Śr. - Srautasūtra S. V. = Sarasvativilāsa 

History of Dharmatāstra 

Sukra = Sukranitisāra Tai. Ar, = Taittiriya Aranyaka Tai. Br. = Taittiriya Brahmana Tai. S. = Taittiriya Samhita Tai. Up. = Taittiriya Upanisad T. L. L. = Tagore Law Lectures Tr. Translation or translated Vaj. S. = Vajasaneya-samhita Vas. = Vasiṣtha-dharma-sūtra V. C. = Vivāda-cintamani V. M. 1= Vyavahāra-matrka of Jimutavāhana (except V. Matrkas on p. 709) V. Mayākha = Vyavahāramayukha (In a very few.places 

such as on p. 709 through oversight V. M. 

stands for V. Mayukha) V. Nir. V. Nirnaya 

senso Vyavahāranirnaya of Varadarāja 

ya V. P. = Vyavaharaprakāsa (a part of the Viramitrodaya 

of Mitramiśra ) V. R. = Vivādaratnākara of Candesvara Visnu 

Viṣnudharmasūtra Visnu Dh. S.S V. T. = Vivadatandava of Kamalakara Vy. Nir 

Nirmaya} = Vyavahāranirnaya of Varadarāja Vy. Nirnayas Yaj. = Yajnavalkyasmrti अथर्व = अथर्ववेद अर्थशास्त्र = कौटिलीय अर्थशास्त्र आप. ध. सू. = आपस्तम्बधर्मसूत्र आप. म. पा. = आपस्तम्बमन्त्रपाठ ऋ. = ऋग्वेद ऐ. ब्रा. = ऐतरेयब्राह्मण कलिवज्यवि. = कलिवयविनिर्णय ( ms) कात्या. = कात्यायनस्मृतिसारोद्धार कात्या. श्री. = कास्यायनश्रौतसूत्र काम कामक८ कामन्दकीयनीतिसार कृत्यर. - कुस्यरत्नाकर 

List of Abbreviations Employed 

को.. = कौटिलीय अर्थशास्त्र कौटिलीय) गृह. र. = गृहस्थरत्नाकर गौ. = गौतमधर्मसूत्र चतुर्वि = चतुर्विशतिमत छा. उ. = छान्दोग्योपनिषद् जै. = जैमिनीयपूर्वमीमांसासूत्र जै. न्या. मा. = जैमिनीयन्यायमालाविस्तार . तै. आ. = तैत्तिरीयारण्यक तै. ब्रा. = तैत्तिरीयब्राह्मण तै. सं. = तैत्तिरीयसंहिता दत्त. च. = दत्तकचन्द्रिका दत्त. मी. = दत्तकमीमांसा नारद. - नारदस्मृति 

नीतिवा. 

नीतिवाक्यामृत 

नीतिवाक्या." नीतिसार = कामन्दकीयनीतिसार परा. मा. = पराशरमाधवीय 

पा. = पाणिनि's अष्टाध्यायी बुध. - बुधभूषण बुधभू. बृह. = बृहस्पतिस्मृति (as quoted in digests) बृह. उप. = बृहदारण्यकोपनिषद् बृहत्सं. = बृहत्संहिता बौ. ध. - बौधायनधर्मसूत्र बौ. श्री. = बौधायनश्रौतसूत्र मद. पा. = मदनपारिजात ममु. = मनुस्मृति मिता. = मिताक्षराटीका of विज्ञानेश्वर मीमांसाको. } = मीमांसाकौस्तुभ of खण्डदेव मेधा. - मेधातिथि' भाष्य on मनुस्मृति या. or याज्ञ. = याज्ञवल्क्यस्मृति रा.ध. कौ. or राजध. कौ. or राजधर्मका. = राजधर्मकौस्तुभ रा.नी.प्र. or राजनी.प्र. or राजनीतिप्र. - राजनीतिप्रकाश of मित्रमित्र राज. र. or राजनीतिर. - राजनीतिरत्नाकर of चण्डेश्वर 

मी. को. 

History of Dharmasastra 

वाज. सं. = वाजसनेयसंहिता वि.वि. = विवादचिन्तामणि वि. ता. = विवादताण्डव of कमलाकर वि. र. = विवादरलाकर व्यव. त. = व्यवहारतत्त्व of रघुनन्दन ध्य. नि or व्यव. नि. = व्यवहारनिर्णय व्य. प्र. = व्यवहारप्रकाश of मित्रमित्र व्य. म. or व्य. मयूख = व्यवहारमयूख ध्य. मा. = व्यवहारमातृका व्यव. सा. = व्यवहारसार 

शुक्र. शुक्रनी. = शुक्रनीतिसार 

शुक्रनीति. 

सं.को. = संस्कारकौस्तुभ सत्या. श्री. = सत्याषाढश्रौतसूत्र स. वि. = सरस्वतीविलास स्मृतिच. = स्मृतिचन्द्रिका स्मृतिमु. = स्मृतिमुक्ताफल 

## Chronological Table

CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

1 of some important works and authors referred to in this volume) 

N. B._Some dates, particularly of aacient works, are more or less 

conjectural. 

4000 B. C. - 1000 B.O.-- The period of the Vedic Samhitas, 

Brāhmaṇas and Upaniṣads. Some hymns of the Rgveda, the Taittiriya Samhita and Brāhmaṇa and the Atharvaveda may possibly go back to a period earlier than even 4000 B. O, and some of the Upaniṣads (even from among those that are regarded as the earliest ones) may be later than 

1000 B.C. 800 B. C. -- 500 B, C, -- The Nirukta. 800 B. C. -- 400 B.C. - The principal srauta sūtras (of Āpas 

tamba, Āśvalāyana, Baudhāyana, Katyāyana, Satyāgādha and others ) and some of the Gphyasūtras ( such as those of 

Āpastamba and Aśvalāyana ). 600 B. O. - 300 B. C. The dharmasutras of Gautama, Āpas 

tamba, Baudhāyana, Vasistha and the Gphyasūtras of 

Pāraskara and a few others. 600 B.C. - 300 B.C. - Pānini. 500 B, C. - 200 B. C. - Jaimini's Pūrvamimāṁsāsūtra. 300 B. C. - Vararuci Kātyāyana, author of Vārtikas on 

Panini. 300 B, C, - 100 A, D. - Arthaśāstra of Kautilya. 150 B.C. - The Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali. 200 B. C. — 100 A. D. – Manusmști. 100 A. D. - 300 A. D. - Yajñavalkyasmṛti. 100 A. D. - 300 A. D. - Viṣṇudharmasūtra. 100 A. D. — 400 A. D. - Nāradasmrti. 200 A. D. -- 500 A, D. - Sabara, com. of Jaimini. 300 A. D. - 500 A. D. - Byhaspatismști on Vyavahāra (not yet 

found. Extracts translated in S. B. E. vol. 33 ). 300 A. D. - 600 A, D. --- Some of the extant Purānas, such as 

Vāyu, Viṇpu, Mārkandeya, Matsya, Kūrma. 

xviiXviii 

History of Dharmafāstra 

400 A. D. 600 A. D. - Kātyāyanasmrti on Vyavahāra (not 

yet found. Extracts collected by me and translated in 

English ). 400 A, D.- 600 A. D. -- Kamandaklyanitisāra. 505 A. D. — 587 A. D. - Varāhamihira, author of Brhatsamhita, 

Brhajjātaka, Pancasiddhāntikā and other works. 600 A. D. -650 A. D. - Bana, author of the Kadambari and 

the Harṣacarita. 050 A, D.- 750 A. D. - Kumārilabhatta, author of śloka 

vārtika, Tantravārtika and Tup-tikā. 600 A. D. -- 900 A, D. - Most of the smṛtis and some of the 

Purāpas. 788 A. D. - 820 A. D. - Saṅkarācārya, the great Advaita 

philosopher. 800 A. D. - 850 A. D. - Viśvarūpa, com, of Yājñavalkyasmrti. 900 A, D. - Medhatithi, com, of Manusmrti. 900 A. D. -- 1100 A. D.---Pārthasarathimisra, author of Sastra 

dipika, Tantraratna, Nyāyaratnākara. 966 A. D. - Utpala, com. of Bșhat-samhita and Bșhajjātaka. 1000 A. D. --- 1055 A. D. — Dhāreśvara ( Bhoja ). 1070 A. D. -- 1100 A. D. — Vijñāpeśvara, the author of the 

Mitakṣarā com. on Yājñavalkya. 1080 -- 1140 A. D.-Govindarāja, author of a com. on Manusmrti. 1100 -- 1150 A. D. -- Lakṣmidhara, author of a large digest 

called Kștya-kalpataru or simply Kalpataru. 1100 -- 1150 A. D. ---Jimūtavāhana, author of Dāyabhāga, Kala 

viveka and Vyavahāramātrkā. 1114 -- 1183 A. D. -- Bhāskarācārya, author of Siddhanta 

siromaṇi, of which Lilāvati is a part. . 1125 A. D. -- Aparārka, author of a com. on the Yajñavalkya 

smrti. 1127 --- 1138 A. D. - Mānasollāsa 'or Abhilaṣitārthacintamani 

of Someśvaradeva. 1150 - 1160 A. D. --- Rajatarangini of Kalhana. .. 1150 - 1200 A. D. – Smrtyarthasara of Sridhara. 

Chronological Table : 

1200 - 1225 A. D. - Smrticandrika of Devannabhatta. 1150 -- 1300 A. D. - Haradatta, com. on Gautamadharmagūtra i and Apastambadharmasūtra. 

1150 -- 1300 A. D. - Kullūka, com. of Manusmrti. 1200-1300 A. D. --- Vyavahāranirnaya of Varadarīja. 1260 -- 1270 A. D. - Caturvargacintamani of Hemādri. 1290 -- 1370 A. D. - Candeśvara, author of Rājanitiratnākara, 

Vivādaratnākara, Grhastharatnākara and other works. 1300 - 1380 A. D. --- Mādhavācārya, author of Parāśarama 

dhaviya. 1360 - 1390 A. D. - Madanapārijāta compiled under king 

Madanapala. ' 1375 -- 1460 A. D. - Śūlapāṇi, author of Dipakalikā, con. on 

Yajñavalkya. 14001 - 1500 A. D. - Nyāyasudha of Somnesvara, coni, on 

Tantravārtika. 1400 - 1450 A, D - Vivādacandra of Misarumisra. 

1425 - 1450 A, D. - Madanaratna of Madanasimha. 

1490 -- 1512 - The Vyavahārasāra of Dalapati, a part of the 

Nṭsimhaprasāda, 1500 - 1525 A. D. , The Sarasvativilāsa compiled under king 

• Pratāparudradeva. 1500 - 1550 A. D. - Vardhamāna, author of Daṇdaviveka. 1500 - 1550 - Vācaspatimisra, author of Vivādacintamani and 

several other works. 1520 - 1575 A. D. - Raghunandana, author of Dāyatattva, 

Divyatattva, Vyavahāratattva and other Tattvas. 1560 - 1620 A. D. -- Saṅkarabhatta, author of Dvaitanirnaya 

or Dharmadvaitanirṇaya. 1590 – 1630 A. D. - Nandapandita, author of the Dattakami 

māṁsā and Vaijayanti, com. on Viṣnudharmasūtra. 1610--1640 A. D.-Kamalakarabhatta, author of Nirnayasindhu, 

Vivādatapdava, Sūdrakamalakara and other works. 

History of Dharmasastra 

1615 - 1645 A. D. - Nilakanthabhatta, author of Nitimayūkha, 

Vyavahāramayūkha and other Mayūkhas. 1615 - 1645 A. D. Mitramiśra, author of Viramitrodaya, 

divided into Rājanitiprakāśa, Vyavhāraprakāsa and other 

prakāśas. 1650 -- 1680 A. D. - Anantadeva, author of Rājadharma 

kaustubha. 1750 -- 1820 A. D. -- Balambhatta, author of the Bālambhatti 

com. on the Mitaksarā. 1790 A. D. - Dharmasindhu of Kaśinātla. 

## Synopsis of Contents

BRIEF SYNOPSIS OF THE CONTENTS 

PAGES RAJADHARMA 

... 1.-241 Chap. I Preliminary ... ... 1-16 Chap. II Seven angas of rājya ... 17-55 Chap. III Duties and responsibilities 

of the ruler 

... 55-103 Chap. IV Ministers 

104-131 Chap. V Rāstra (territory of a State)... 132-177 Chap. VI Durga (capital or fort) ... 178-183 Chap. VII Kośa (Treasury or 

finance). 

184-199 Chap. VIII Bala (Army) ... 

200–215 Chap. IX Mitra (Ally) ... ... 216-234 Chap. X Purpose of the study of Rāja 

dharma and the ends of the State. 

... 235-241 

VYAVAHĀRA 

... 242-824 Chap. XI Meaning of Vyavahāra, Vya 

vahārapadas, Kautilya on this subject, grades of courts, Judges, Lawyers, court fees, pleadings, means of proof, documents. 

242-316 Chap. XII Bhukti (possession) ... 317-329 Chap. XIII Witnesses . ... 

330-360 Chap. - XIV Divya (ordeals) ... 

361-378 Chap. XV Decision, decree, fines and 

punishments, Limitation ... 379-410 Chap. XVI Contracts, debts, pledges, - mortgages. . 

... 411-461 Chap. XVII Asyāmivikraya (sale by one 

not the owner) ... 

462-465 1x1 

History of Dharmasastra 

frift. 

He 

PAGES Chap. XVIII Sambhūya-samutthāna (part. 

nership) ... ..466-470 Chap. XIX Dattā napakarma (resump 

tion of gift). 

... 471-475 Chap. XX Vetanasyānapākarma, Abhiyu- .. 

petyāsusrūṣā and svāmipāla 

vivāda. 

476-485 Char. XXl Saṁvid-vyatikrama (viola 

tion of compacts) and other 

tities of law. ... ... 486-501 Chap. XXII Simavivāda (boundary dis 

pute). 

... 502-510 Chap. XXIII Vākpārusya and Danda 

pāruṣya (abuse and assault). 511-518 Chap. XXIV Steya ( theft) ... ... 519-530 Chap. XXV Strlsangrahaṇa (adultery, 

incest and rape). ... 531-537 Chap. XXVI Dyūtasamāhvaya (gambling 

and prizefighting) 

... 538-542 Chap. XXVII Dāyabhāga (partition of 

'wealth) ... ... 543-661 Chap. XXVIII Dattaka (adopted son). ... 662-699 Chap. XXIX Order of succession after 

the son. 

... 700-769 Chap. XXX Stridhana ( woman's property ). 770-80% Chap. XXXI Maintenance and other topics, 

wills, draft Hindu Code.... 803-824 

SADĀCĀRA (customs and customary laws). 

825-973 

Chap. XXXII Practices of sistas; conflict 

among sruti, smrti and sada cāra: ancient instances of transgressions of dharma; 

customs and pūrvamimams.. 825-855 Ohap. XXXIII Customs and dharmasastra 

works. 

... 856-884 

Brief Synopsis of the contents 

xxiii 

PAGES 

Chap. XXXIV Kalivariya (actions for 

bidden in the Kali age), theory of Yugas, the date of the Mahabharata war, begin 

ning of Kaliyuga. Chap. XXXV Customs in modern Indian 

... 

885–968 

Law. 

969-973 

## Works Consulted

WORKS CONSULTED 

(with reference to editions &c.) (N. B.Works referred to only once or twice and those already set out on pp. 14n and 413-414 have generally been omitted ). 

Anap, stands for Ānandāśrama Press edition, B. I. stands for Biblio. *.theca Indica Series (Calcutta ) and Jiv, for Jivananda Vidyasagara's 

poblications. 

TEXTS 

Vedic 

Aitareya Araṇyaka (ed. by Prof. Keith in Anecdota Oxoniensia) Aitareya Brāhmaṇa with Sāyaṇa's commentary ( Anan.). Atharvaveda Samhitam-ed by S. P. Pandit. Bșhadāraṇyakopan iṣad. Chandogyopaniṣad. Gopatha-brahmana ( in the B. I. series ; but in one or two places 

Dr. Gastra's edition has been relied upon). Kathaka Samhita-ed. by L. von Schroeder (1900 ). Kauṣitaki Aranyaka. Kausitaki-brālimanopaniṣad. Maitrāyana Samhitā-med. by Dr. Schroeder. Rgveda Samhita (Max Müller's edition in 4 volumes has gene 

rally been used. Sometimes the edition of the Poona 

Vaidika-saisodhana-mandala has been relied on). Sāmavidhāna-brāhmapa-ed. by A. C. Burnell, 1873, Sāṅkhāyana-brahmaṇa, (Anan.). Satapatha-brahmapamed. by Weber. Taittiriya-āraṇyaka ( Anan). Taittiriya-brahmana ( Ānan.). Taittiriya Sainhita (Anan; sometimes Weber's transliteration 

in Indische Studien, volumes XI and XII, has beon relied 

upon). Tandya-brāhmaṇa (also called Pancavimsa-brahmana )-B. I 

Series. Vajasaneya Samhita-edited by Weber. 

XXVI 

History of Dharmasastra Srauta, grhya and dharma sūtras, Vedāngas and similar works. Apastamba Dharmasūtra with commentary of Haradatta pub 

Jished at Kumbhakonam by Halasyanatha Sastri. A pastambagshyasūtra with the com, of Sudarśanācārya (Mysore 

Government Oriental Library Series ). Apastamba-mantrapātha-edited by Dr. Winternitz (1897). Apastamba-srautasūtra- edited by Dr. Garbe (B. I. Series ). Aśvalāyana-grhya-zūtra with Nārāyaṇa's commentary (Nirnaya 

sāgara edition) Asvalayana-srautasūtra with the commentary of Nārāyana 

(B. I. Series ). Baudhāyanadharmasutra ( Anan). Baudhāyana-gphya-sesasūtra (ed, by Dr. Sham Sastri in Mysore 

University Oriental Library publications, (1920 ). Baudhāyana-gphya-paribhāṣa ( in thu above edition). Baudhāyana-pitrmedhasūtra ( contained in the Mysore edition 

above). Baudhāyana-śrauta-sūtra ( ed. by Dr. Caland in B. I. Series ). Bhāradvāja-gļhya-sūtra, ed. by Dr. Salomons (Leyden, 1913). Brhad-devatā, ed. by Prof. A. A. Macdonell in the Harvard 

Oriental Series (two volumes ). Gautama-dharmasūtra ( Anan.). Gobhila-gļhyasūtra ( B. I. Series ). Gobhila-smrti ( Ānan.). 

Hiraṇyakeśi-gphya-sūtra, edited by Dr. J. Kirste (Vienna 1889). Jaimini's Pūrva-mimāṁsā-sūtra with the Bhāsya of Sabara 

(Anan.) Kathaka-grhya, with the commentaries of Adityadarśana, 

Devapāla and Brāhmanabala, ed. by Dr. Caland (1925). Katyāyana-srauta-sūtra, edited by Dr. Weber, 1859. Kausika-sūtra, edited by Prof. Bloomfield, 1890. Khadira-gphya-sūtra with the commentary of Rudraskanda 

(Mysore Government Oriental Library Series ). Mānavagṛhya-sūtra with the commentary of 'Astāvakra 

(Gaikwad Oriental Series, Baroda ). Nirukta of Yāska edited by Roth. Sometimes the edition of 

Prof. V. K. Rajwade with a translation and notes in Marathi has been relied upon 

Works Consulted 

XXVII 

Paraskara-gphya-sutra edited by MM. Shridharshastri Pathak 

with a Marathi translation. Saṅkhāyana-gphya-sutra (same as Kausitaki-gshya-sūtra ), 

published in the Benares Sanskrit Series. Saṅkhayanaśrautasūtra, edited by Dr. Hillebrandt (B. I. Series). Satyāṣādha-srautasūtra (Anan.) Vaikhānasa-smārta-sūtra, edited with English translation by 

Dr. Caland, Calcutta, 1927. Vārdhagļhya-sutra (Gaikwad Oriental Series, Baroda ). Vasiṣtha-dharmasutra ( Bombay S. Series ). Viṣnudharmasutra, edited by Dr. Jolly. 

Smrtes Apastamba-smrti (in verse )-Ānan. Arthaśāstra of Kautilya_edited by Dr. Sham Sastri (Mysore, 

1919). Atri-smrti ( Anan.). Auśanasa-smrti (Jiv.). Bphat-Parāśarasmrti (Jiv. ). Caturvimśati-mata-gamgraha (Benares Sanskrit Series ). Dakṣasmrti ( Ānan.). Devalasmrti ( Anan.). Harivamsa (Venkateśvara Press edition). Kātyāyana-smrti on Vyavahāra (re-constructed by P. V. Karte 

under the title 'Katyāyanasmrtisāroddhāra,' with English 

translation and notes ). Laghu-Asvalāyana-smrti ( Ānan.). Laghu-Hārsta-smrti ( Ānan.). Laghu-Viṣnu-smrti ( Anan.). Laghu-Vyāsa (Jiv.). Mahābhārata with the commentary of Nilakantha (the oblong 

Bombay edition). In some places the corresponding criti cal edition of the Epic issued from the Bhandarkar 0. R. 

Institute has been referred to. Manusmrti with the commentary of Kullūka (Nirnayasāgara 

edition); where other commentaries are referred to, it is 

Mandlik's edition with six commentaries that is cited. Nāradasmști, edited by Dr. Jolly. Parāśarasmrti (Bombay S. Series ).XXVIII 

History of Dharmasastra 

Prajāpati-smrti ( Anan.). Vedavyasa-smrti ( Anan.). Vṛddha-Gautama-smrti (Jir.). Vṭddba-Hārīta-smrti ( Ānan.). Yajñavalkyagmrti with the Mitāksarā (Nirnayasāgara edition) 

Purāruus Agnipurāṇa-l Ānan.) Bhāgavatapurāna with the commentary of Sridhara (Ganpat 

Krishnaji Press). Brahmāṇdapurāṇa ( Venkatesvara Press, Bombay). Brahmapurāṇa-( Ānan.) Brhan-Nāradiya-purāṇa (Venkateśvara Press edition, Bombay). Garuda-purāṇa (Venkateśvara Press edition). Kālikā-purāṇa (Venkateśvara Press edition). Kalki-purāṇa (Venkatesvara Press edition). Kūrmapurāṇa. Lingapurāṇa (Venkateśvara Press edition). Mārkaṇdeya-purana (B. I. Series). Matsyapurāpa ( Anan.). Nāradiyapurāpa (Venkateśvara Press ed., Bombay); sometimes 

cited as Bṛhan-Nāradīya. Nșsimhapurāṇa, (published by Messrs. Gopal Narayan & Co., 

Bombay 1911). Vāyupurāṇa (Anan.). Visṇudharmottara-purāna (Venkatesvara Press, Bombay). Visnupurāna with commentary (published by Messrs. Gopal 

Narayan & Co., Bombay ). 

Commentaries, digests, miscellaneous Sanskrit 

and Prakrit works and authors. Abhilasitārthacintāmaṇi (also called Managollāsa l-published 

in the Gaikwad Oriental Series, Baroda, Ācāraratna-Nirnayasagara Press, Bombay (Pothi size). Aparārka's commentary on the Yajñavalkya smrti ( Anan.) Asahāyamsee under Nāradasmrti. Bālambhatti-edited by Principal J. R. Gharpure. Bārhaspatyasūtra, edited by Dr. F. W. Thomas, Lahore, 1921. Bhāmati of Vācaspatimiśra, com. on Samkara's bhāsya.on the 

Vedāntasūtra (Nirnayasāgara Press). 

Works Consulted 

xxlx 

Bhavanātha's Nayaviveka (Madras University Sanskrit Series, 

No. 12). Bphati, commentary of Prablıākara on Jaimini's Pārvamimāms 

sūtra (Tarkapada -in the Madras University Sanskrit 

Press, 1936. Brhatsamhitā of Varahamihira with the commentary of Utpala 

edited by MM. Sudhakara Dvivedi in two volumos, 

Benares. Budhabhūṣana, edited by Prof. H. D. Velankar, Bombay. Dandaniti, of Keśavapapdita, edited by V. S. Bendrey, Poona. Dandaviveka of Vardhaināua (Gaikwad Oriental Series ). Dasakumāracarita of Dandin (Bombay Sanskrit Series ). Dattakacandrikā ( Anan). Dattakamimāṁsā ( Anan. ). Dāyabhāga of Jimūtayāhana (Jiv. 1863 ). Dāyatattva of Raghunandana (Jiv.) Dharmadvaitanirṇaya of Samkarabhatta (ed. by Principal J.R. 

Gharpure ). Dharmakosa, Vyavahārakānda, vol. I-III published by Prājña 

pāthaśālā-mandala, Wai. Dharmasindhu of Kaśinātha with Marathi translation ( Nirnaya 

sāgara Press, 6th ed. of 1936). Dipakalika, com. on Yājñavalkyasmrti ( ed. by Principal J. R. 

Gharpure). Divyatattva of Raghunandana (Jiv.). Divyāvadāna, edited in Ronian characters by Cowell and Neil 

(Cambridge, 1886 ). Govindarāja's commentary on Manusmrti (Mandlik's edition 

of Manusmrti). Grhastharatnākara of Candeśvara (B. I. Series ). Haradatta's com, on Gautama-dharmasūtra ( Anan.). Haradatta's com, on Āpastambadharma-sūtra (vide above under 

. Apastambadharmasutra ). Hargacarita of Bāṇa (ed. by P. V. Kane). Hemadri's Caturvarga-cintāmaṇi ( B. I. Series ). Jaiminlya-nyaya-mālāvistāra of Madhavācārya ( Anan.). Jātakas ( ed. by Fausböll ). Kādambari of Bāṇa (edited by P. V. Kane). 

History of Dharmasastra 

Kamasutra of Vatsyāyana (Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series ). - Kaśikā, commentary on Pāṇini's sūtras (Benares). Kavyanzimāmsā of Rajasekhara (Gaikwad Oriental Series ). Khandadeva's Mimāṁsākaustubha (Chowkhamba Sanskrit 

Series ). Kęspabhatta-vide under Nirnayasindhu. Krtyaratnākara of Candeśvara (B. I. Series ). Kșirasvāmin's commentary on Amarakośa (edited by Mr. K. G. 

Oak, Poona, 1913). Kullūka's commentary on Manusmrti (published by Nirnaya. 

sāgara Press, Bombay, 1909). Kumārila’s Tantravārtika and Tupṭikā on Jaimini.( Anan.). Lilāvati of Bhaskarācārya (Anan., 1937). Madanapārijāta ( B. I. Series ). Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali (edited by Dr. Kielhorn in the Bombay 

Sanskrit Series). Malamāsatattva of Raghunandana (Jiv.) Mālavikāgnimitra of Kalidasa (Bombay Sanskrit Series) ed. 

by S. P. Pandit. Māṁsatattvaviveka of Visvanātha (Sarasvatibhavana series, 

Benares ). Mānasollasa, same as Abhilaṣitārtha-cintāmaṇi. Mayūkhamālika, com. on the Sõstra-dipikā (Nirnayasāgara 

edition ) Medhātithi's commentary on Manusnirti (Mandlik's edition). Misarumisra's Vivādacandra, edited by Priya Nath Mitra, 

Calcutta, 1931. Mitākṣarā, commentary on Yājñavalkya-smrti (Nirpaya 

sāgara ed.) Mitramisra's commentary on Yājñavalkya-smrti (in the Chow 

khamba Sanskrit Series), Mrcchakatika of Sūdraka (Bombay S. Series), edited by N. B. 

Godbole. Nandana, commentator of Manusmrti (Mandlik's edition). Nandapandita, author of Dattaka-mimāmga and Vaijayanti, a 

com. on Viṣnudharma-sutra. Nārāyaṇa, commentator of Asyalāyana-srautapatra (B. I. edi 

tion) and of Asvalāyana-gphya (Nirnayasāgara edition). Nārāyana, commentator of Manusmrti (Mandlik's edition). 

Works Consulted 

Nilakantha, com. of the Mahabhārata. Nilakantha, author of the Vyavahara-mayūkha ( ed. by P, V, 

Kane), Nitimayukha ( ed. by Principal J. R. Gharpure), 

Samaya-mayūkha ( ed. by Principal J. R. Gharpure). Nirnayasindhu of Kamalakara with Marathi translation 

( Nirnayasāgara Press, Bombay, 2nd Ed. 1935 ). Nirnayasindhu, with the com. of Kroṇabhatta (Chowkhamba 

Sanskrit series ). Nitiprakāśikā, edited by Dr. Oppert. Nitisāra of Kamandaka (B. I. Series ). Nitivakyāmrta of Somadova, (Manikchandra Jaingranthamāla 

Series, Bombay). Nyayasudhā, com. on Tantravārtika (Chowkhamba Sanskrit 

Series, 1909). Pancatantra ( Bombay S. Series ). Pāṇini's Astādhyāyi with Siddhanta-kaumudi of Bhattoji (Nir. 

paya-sāgara edition, 1929). Parāśara-Madhaviya (Bombay S. Series). Paribhāsāprakāsa (part of Viramitrodaya ) of Mitramiśra (Chow. 

khamba Sanskrit Series ). Prayascittatattva of Raghunandana (Jiv.). Ragbunandana, author of numerous works called Tattvas. Raghuvamsa of Kalidasa. Rajadharmakāṇda (a portion of the Kalpataru of Lakṣmidhara ) 

edited by Jagadish Lal Shastri, Lahore, 1942. Rajadharmakaustubha of Anantadeva (Gaikwad's Oriental 

Series, Baroda ). Rājanltiprakāśa (part of Viramitrodaya of Mitramiśra )-Chow 

khamba Sanskrit Series. Rājanitiratnākara of Candeśvara (edited by K. P. Jayaswal, 

1924). Rājatarangipi, text and translation edited by Dr. Stein, 1900. Rāmāyana of Valmiki, edited by R. Narayanasvami Aiyer at the 

Madras Law Journal Office, 1993. Sabara, author of bhāsya on Jaimini's Pūrvamsmāmsāsūtra 

(Anan.). Sahyadrikhanda, edited by Dr. Gerson Da Cunha, Sakuntala of Kalidasa. 

History of Dharmaśāstra 

Samayaprakāśa ( part of Viramitrodaya of Mitramiéra )-Chow 

khamba Sanskrit Series. Samskāra-kaustubha of Anantadeva published with Marathi 

translation by Venkatacharya Upadhye, Baroda. Samskāraprakasa (part of Viramitrodaya )-Chowkhamba Sans 

krit Series. Samkarācārya's bhāsya on the Vedānta-sūtra (Nirnayasagara 

ed.). Sarasvativilāsa of Pratāprudradeva (published by Mysore 

University Oriental Library ). Sarvajña-Nārāyana, commentator of Manusmști (Mandlik's 

edition ). Sastradipikā of Pārthasārathi--miśra with the commentaries 

called Mayūkhamālikā and Yuktisnehaprapūraṇi (Nirnaya 

sāgara Press, Bombay, 1916 ). Sāyana's blāsya on the Rgveda (edited by Vaidika-samso 

dhana-mandala, Poona). Smrti-candrikā of Devangabhatta ( edited by Principal J. R. 

Gharpure). Smrtikaustubha of Anantadeva (Nirnayasagara ed.). Smrtimuktāphala of Vaidyanātha (in six parts, edited by 

Principal J. R, Gharpure). Smrtyarthasāra of Sridhara ( Anan.). Srāddhatattva of Raghunandana (Jiv.). Subodhini of Viśveśvara, com. on the Mitākṣarā ( Vyavahāra 

portion, ed. by Principal J. R. Gharpuro). Sūdrakamalakara of Kamalakara (published by Nirnayasagara 

Press, 4th ed.). Sukranitisāra, edited by Jivananda. Tantraratna of Pārthasārathi (published in the Sarasvati 

bhavana series, Benares, two parts ). Taptravārtika of Kumārila ( Ānan.). Tithitattva of Raghunandana (Jiv. ). Utpala, commentator of Bphatsambitā (edited by Pandit Sudha 

kara Dvivedi). Viramitrodaya of Mitramiśra (vide under Paribhāṣāprakāśa, 

Rajanitiprakāśa, Samayaprakāśa, Vyavahāraprakāśa ). Visvarūpa, commentator on Yājñavalkyasmrti (published in 

the Trivandrum Sanskrit series ). 

.:Works Consulted 

Xxxiii. 

Vivādacandra of Migarumiśra (vide above under Misąru-. 

miśra). Vivāda-cintāmaṇi of Vācaspati, ed. 1837, Calcutta. Vivādaratnākara of Candeśvara (B. I. Series, first edition). 

The second edition of 1931 slightly differs (from 1 to 4 

pages ) from the first edition, Vivādatāndava of Kamalakara (Ms. in the Fergusson College, 

Poona ). Vyavahāramātṛkā of Jimutavāhana (edited by Sir Asutosh 

Mukerji) in Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 

Vol. III. Vyavahāramayukha of Nilakantha (ed. by P. V. Kane ). . Vyavahāranirnaya of Varadarāja (published in the Adyar 

Library Series, ed. by Rao Bahadur K. V. Rangaswami 

Aiyangar). Vyavahāraprakāśa (part of Viramitrodaya of Mitramiśra 

Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series. Vyavahārasāra of Dalapati (part of Nṛsimhaprasada )-published 

in the Sarasvatibhavana Texts Series, Benaros. Vyavahāratattva of Raghunandana (Jiv.). Yagastilaka of Somadeva (Nirnayasāgara edition ). Yogayatrā of Varāhamihira. Yuktikalpataru of Bhoja, edited by Pandit Isvaracandra, 

Sāstri, Calcutta, 1917. 

Modern Authors and Works in English Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations' (ed. by Rogers, 1869). Aiyangar, Rao Bahadur K. V. Rangaswami on 'Ancient Indian 

Polity' (1935). Aiyer, Mr. Velandi Gopal on 'Chronology of Ancient India'. Alberuni's 'India' translated by Dr. Sachau in two volumes 

. (London, 1888). Mr. J. J. Anjaria, author of 'Nature and grounds of political 

obligation in the Hindu State' (1935). . Banerjee, Sir Gooroodas, author of 'Marriage and stridhana' 

(5th edition, 1923). Barnes, Mr. Harry E., author of 'Story of punishment'. Barnett, Dr. L. D., author of Antiquities of India'. Beal's Buddhist Records of the Western world, 

XXXIV 

History of Dharmasastra 

Dr. Beni Prasad's Theory of Government in Ancient India! 

(1927), "The State in Ancient India' (1938) and · Hindu 

Political Theories '. Berolzheimer, author of 'the world's legal philosophies' (trans 

lated by Jastrow, New York, 1929). Best, author of work on the Principles of the law of Evidence 

(12th ed., 1922). Prof. D. R. Bhandarkar's 'Some Aspects of Ancient Hindu' 

Polity', Bluntschli's Theory of the State' (Oxford, 1885). Dr. J. M. Brow's 'In the service of Youth' 1943. Dr. G. Bichler's 'Origin of the Brāhmi Alphabet'. Chan-toon on 'Principles of Buddhist Law'. Dr. Bijan Raj Chatterji's 'Indian Cultural influence in 

Cambodia'. Colebrooke's Digest of Hindu Law. Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. I edited by Dr. Hultzsch. Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. III ed. by Dr. Fleet (also 

cited as Gupta Inscriptions ). Cunnigham's 'Coins of Ancient India'. Dr. K. L. Daftari's 'Astronomical Method' (Nagpur, 1942). Mr. G. T. Date's 'Art of War'in Ancient India'. Rhys Davids 'Buddbist India' (1903). Prof. V. R. Ramchandra Dikshitar's 'Mauryan Polity ., . Hindu 

administrative institutions and translation of 'Silappadi 

kāram'. Elphinstone's History of India'. . Epigraphia Indica. Fa Hien's 'Record of Buddhist Kingdoms' translated by James 

Legge ( 1886 ). Fick's 'Social organization of North-East India in Buddha's 

time' translated by Dr. S. K. Maitra (Calcutta, 1928). Dr. U. N. Ghoshal's 'History of Hindu Political Theories'. Grant Duff's 'History of the Marathas' Dr. Hart's Way of Justice'. Holdsworth’s ‘History of English Law ( ed. of 1931 ). Hopkins' paper on 'Position of the Ruling Caste' in Journal 

of the American Oriental Society, Vol. XIII. 

VB. 

Works Consulted 

John Jardine's 'Notes on Buddhist Law.' Dr. K. P. Jayaswal's Hindu Polity', 'History of India' (1933), 

*Manu and Yajnavalkya. Dr. Jolly's Recht and Sitte' translated by Mr. Batakrishna 

Ghose, Calcutta, 1928. Sir William Jones' Works ed. by Lord Teignmouth. Prof. A. B. Keith's translation of the Taittiriya Samhita in the 

Harvard Oriental Series, Vedic Index' (jointly with 

Prof. Macdonell ). Korkunovs' General Theory of Law' (tr. by W. G. Hastings, 

New York, 1922). Laski's 'Grammar of Politics'. MacCrindle's 'Ancient India as recorded by Megasthenes 

and 'Invasion of India by Alexander'. Sir Henry Maine's 'Ancient Law' (1866, 3rd ed.) and 'Early 

History Institutions' (1875). Dr. R. C. Majmudar's 'Champa'; 'Suvarnadvipa'; 'Corporate 

Life in Ancient India', Rao Saheb V. N. Mandlik's Hindu Law. Sir John Marshall's three volumes on 'Mohenjo-daro'. Max Müller's History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, J. D. Mayne's Hindu Law ( 10th ed.). Dr. R. N. Mehta's 'Pre-Buddhist India' (1939). Dr. C. Minakshi's ' Administration and Social life under the 

Pallayas : Prof. Nilkanta Sastri, author of 'Pandyan Kingdom' and 

Studies in Cola History'. Ortolan's 'History of Roman Law' translated by Pritchard 

and Nagmith, (1871 ). Pannalal's Kumaun Local custonis. Plato's Republic' (Jowett's translation) and 'Laws' 

(Random Houge edition ). Prabandhacintamani, translated by Tawney. Dr. Pran Nath's 'Study of the economic condition of Ancient 

India'. Justice M. G. Ranade's 'Rise of the Maratha Power'. Rapson's 'Indian Coins'. Sacred Books of the East, edited by Max Müller. Salmond, author of 'Jurisprudence'. 

VAS, 

*XXFI 

History of Dharmasastra 

Mr. G. S. Sardesai, editor of 'Selections from Peshwa's Daftar'. Prof. B. K. Sarkar's 'Positive background of Hindu Sociology'. Mr. Golapchandra Sarkar's 'Hindu Law', 'Adoption.. -Mr. Himansu Bhuslian Sarkar's 'Indian influence on the 

Literatura of Java and Bali'. Mr. Kishori Lal Sarkar's 'Mimāṁsā rules of interpretation' 

(Tagore Law Lectures, Calcutta ). Dr. Rajkumar Sarvadhikari's Tagore Law Lectures on Inheri. 

tance, Partition and Adoption (2nd edition of 1922 ). Dr. Sham Sastri's translation of Kautilya's Arthaśāstra. Dr. Priya Nath Sen's 'Hindu Jurisprudence' (Tagore Law 

Lectures ). Stephen's A History of the Criminal Law of England' in 

three volumes (ed. of 1883 ). Stoke's Hindu Law Books. Sir Thomas Strange's 'Hindu Law' (ed. of 1830 ), Taylor on 'Evidence' ( ed. of 1848). Mr. C. V. Vaidya's 'Mahābhārata, a criticism': Vogel's 'Inscriptions from Chamba'. Wills on 'Principles of circumstantial evidence' (7th ed. 

1937). : 

## Table of Cases Cited

TABLE OF CASES CITED 

(Volumes of reports are not specified where the names of parties are given, but volumes are cited at the end of this table where the names of parties are not mentioned in the text). 

Abilakb v. Bhekhi 617a. 

| Bai Parson v. Bai Somli 5510, Advyappa v. Rudrava 7170, 

Bai Raman v. Jagjivandas 794. Ahmed Khan v. Channi Bibi 9710, Bajapa v. Trimbak 581n. Ajai Verma v. Vijai Kumari 9710 Bajirao v. Ramkrisboa 671, Akku v, Ganesh 810n, 812. 

Bajrangi v. Manokarnika 7170. Aksbaya Chandra v. Haridas 739n. Bal v. Maneklal 4470. Amarendra Man Singh v. Sanatan 6660. Bal Gangadhar v. Shrinivas 6880. Ambabai v. Keshav 545. 

Balabai v. Mahadu 681n. Amirthammal v. Vallimayil 612. 

Balasubramanya v. M. Subbayya 669, Anandi v. Hari 723n. 

756, 758n. Anandilal v, Chandrabai 812 

Bala Krishnayya v. Venkata 698n, Adandrao v. Shankar 971n. 

Balkrishna v. Gopal 425n. Anant v. Dnyaneshwar 674. 

Balkrishna v. Laksbman 722n, Anant v. Shapkar 672. 

Balu v, Laboo 671. Apanthaya v. Vishau 809n. 

Balwantrao v. Baji Rao 782n. Angammal v. Vepkata 808. 

Basangavda v, Basangavda 7520. Apaji v. Ramchandra 570. Appaji v. Mohanlal 732n, 7520. 

Basappa v. Gurulingawa 6877, 6970, 

724n. Apya v. Ramakka 685. Ardeshir v. The Collector of Surat 305n. 

Basappa v. Rayava 724n. Asita v. Nirode 699a, 

Basappa v. Shidramappa 5740. Atmaram v Bajirao 599n, 753n, 780n. 

Basant v. Brijraj 970n. 

Basvaat v. Mallappa 674n. Baba Narayan v, Saboosa 970n. 

Beharilal v. Kaildas Chunder 693n Baboo Ganesh Dutt v, Maharaja 

Beni Prasad v. Hardai Bibi 676. Mobeshur 631. 

Bhagavati Shukul v. Ram Jatan 620. Babui Rita v, Babu Purao 659, 

Bhagirthibai v. Kahnujirao 716n, 796n, Babuna v. Jagat Narain 608. 

Bhagwan v. Bhagwan 664n, 665, 6830. Badri Roy v. Bhugvat 608a. 

Bhagwan v. Warubai 7270. Bai Devkore v. Amritram 7530, Bai Gulab v, Jivanlal 599n. 

Bharmappa v. Vjjaagauda 667. Bai Kasbi v. Jampadas 600n. 

Bhau v. Raghunath 7820, 785a. 

Bhau v Suadrabai 8672, 9710. Bai Keserba v. Shivsangji 6900, 694n, 

697a. 

Bhikubai v. Hariba 8040, 8070, 808. Bai Kesgarbai v. Hunsraj 800n, 

Bhikya v. Babu 7170. Bai Mahalaxmi y. The Deputy Nazir 

Bhimabai v. Gurunathgauda 670. 750. 

Bhola v. Kausilla 7089. Bai Mancha v, Narotamdas 584n. 

Bbugwandeen v. Myna Baee 7100. Bai Mani y. Usafalt 4470. 

Bhyah Ram singh v. Bhyab Ugur Bai Monghibat v. Bai Nagubai 811. 

Singh 875o. Bai Nagubai v. Bai Moagbibai 8!1,814. Birbhadra v. Kalpataru 6910.“ " . Bai Nam. v. Chunilal 684n. ... | Brij Mohao v. Kishua Lal 758A., : 

IIIIxxviii . History of Dharmasāstra Brij Naraio v. Mangla Prasad 448, Ekallu Subbarami v, Ekallu Cheachu. 

5540, 822 

raghavan 622n. Buddha Singh v. Laltu Singh 7320, Ekoba v. Kashiram 727a, 

7350, 750a. 

Emperor v, Bal Gangadhar Tilak 331A. 

Fakirappa v. Chapappa 5940, Cally Churn v. Bluggobutty 574n, Chalakonda Alsani v. Chalakonda | Fakirappa v. Savitrewa 667, 

Ratnachalam 584n. 

Fakirappa v. Yellappa 7670. Chandika v, Muda 729n, 9710. 

Fattehsangji v. Desai Kalliaoraiji 5750. Cbandreshwar v. Bisheshwar 681n. Framji v. Commissioner of Customs 

305n, Chaudhuri Govindchandra v. Haya. 

griba 4480. 

Gadadhar v. Chandrabhagabai 709. Chemnauth v. Palakuzhu 659, 

Gajadhar Prasad v, Gauri Shankar Chengama v, Munisami 596n, 

76in, Chima v, Padmanabha 757n. 

Gajanan v. Kasbinath 683. Chunilal v. Surajram 8670. 

Gandhi Maganlal v, Bai Jadab 7520, Collector of Madura v. Mootoo 599n, 

7930. 665, 669n, 711, 780n, 875n, 878. 

Ganesh Dutt v, Jewach 6390, Collector of Masulipatam v. Cavaly 

Ganga v. Gbasita 788, 808. Venkata 7630. 

Gangabai v, Anant 675n. Collector of Thana v. Hari 5750. 

Gangadhar v, Ibrahim 700n, Collector of Thana v. Krishnadatb 

Ganga Reddi v, Tammi Reddi 5930. 575n. 

Ganga Sabai v. Lekhraj 664n, 681. Commissivner of Incometax v, Laxmi 

Gangu v. Chandrabhagabai 672. Darayan 591. 

Ganpat y, Gopalrao 596n. Dalglish v. Guzuffer 826n, 

Ganpatrao v. Balkrishna 6870. Damodardas v. Purmanandas 709,7850. Garurudhwaja v, Saparandhwaja 970a Damodardas v. Uttamram 606n, 625n. 

Gbasiti Umrao v, Umrao Jan 972a. Dattatraya v, Gangabai 6980. 

Ghelabhai v. Hargovan 575n. Dattatraya v. Govind 690a, 693n, Giriappa v. Ningappa 698n. Dayaldas v. Savitribai 797n. 

Girimallappa v. Kencbava 9720, Dayavati v. Kesarbai 812. 

Girjabai v. Sadashiv 5620, Debi Das v. Mukat Behari 758n, 759. Gokalchand v. Hukamchand 584n. Debi Mangal Prasad v, Mabadeo 

Gopal v. Gangaram 525n, Prasad 783a. 

Gopal v. Haomapt 683a. Debi Parsbad v. Thakur Dial 6320, 

Gopalayyan v. Raghupatiayyan 9710, 638a. 

Gopalrao v. Trimbakrao 631. Deivanayaga v. Muttu 9710. 

Govind v. Bhiku 718, 7310, 8010, 

Deokishen v, Budh Prakash 617n. 

Govind v. Trimbak 588. Dharma v. Ramkrishna 6810. 

Govindayyar v. Dorasani 688n, 

Dharmapuram v. Virapandiam 765n. 

Govind prasad V. Raghunathprasad Dhir Narsin v. Shiv Sabay 448n, 

4470, 4610, Digambar v. Dhanraj 571n. 

Gridhari Lall v, The Bengal Govera Dipanath v. Sadashiv 9720. 

ment 7550, Duggirala Veeranna v. Duggirala Hajarimali v. Abaninath 3770. 

Sārasiratnam 9720. 

Hanmant v. Ganosh 872. Dular Koeri v, Dwarkanath 606n, Hannaot v. Vasudev 758n. Durga Dat v, Ganesb 384, 

Hargobind v.-Dhapako Singh 810n. . 

Table of Cases Cited 

xxxx 

Haridas v, Ranchordas 730D. | Kottapalli v. Kaouparti 4480, Harischandra v. Atir 7650. 

K. R. Saṅkaralingam v. Velocdami Hemraj v. Khemchand 4470. 

671. Hira v Radba 972n. 

Krishnaji v. Moro 584a, Hirachand v. Sojpal 6718, 

Krishnaji v. Ragbavendra 667. Hiralal v. Meghraj 809n, 810R 

Krishnalal v. Nandeshwar 608n. Hiralal v. Tripura 8019. 

Krisbnayyan v. Muthusami 809. Hosbapna v. Devanda 606n. 

Kumaran v, Narayanan 658, Hucbrao v. Bhimrao 6850. 

Kuppa v. Singarvelu 810n. Hunooman persad v. Mussummat 

Lachmandas v. Khunnu 4440. Babooee 449, 7840. 

Ladu Narayan v. Gobard ban 4440. Huri Das v. Bamchurn 743n, 

Lakbmichand v. Apandi 808, In re Munshiram 6750, 

Lakshman v. Jamnabai 584 n. Irappa v. Rachayya 6710 

Lakshman v. Satyabbamabai 804a. 

816n Jairam v. Nathu 6060, 6210. 

Lakshmandas v. Manohar 575a. Jamnabai v, Kbimji 715n. 

Lallubhai v. Bai Amrit 3050, 317n, Jamnabai v. Vasudev 608n. 

6380. Janglubai v. Jetha Appaji 7930. 

jaokibai v. Sundrabai 796n. 

Lallubhai v. Mankorebai 7010, 752, 

796n. Jatindra Mohuo v. Ghanashyama 5750. Jipappa v. Chimmava 593a. 

Lallubhoy v. Cassibai 752a. Jodu Rosamma v. Jodu Chencbiab 

Laxmipatirao v. Venkatesh 6850. 

6050. 

Lingayya v. Chengalammal 6810. 

Lopes v. Lopes 969. Jogesh Chuadra y Nrityakali 664n. Jogul Kishore v. Shib Sabai 5710, 

Lowji v. Mithabai 757. Juggomobuo Ghose v. Manikchand Madana Mohana v. Purshothama 673. 

826n. 

Madhavrao v. Raghavendrarao 9710 Jugmohandas v. Sir Mangaldas 5770 Mab Nhin Bwin v. U, Schwe Gone 

8188. 

6410, 

Mahableshwar v. Subramanya 6930. Kailash Chandra v, Karuna Nath 746n 

Mabamaya Debi v. Haridas 970n. Kalgauda v, Somappa 6818. 

Mahant Garuddas v, Mahant Laldas Kali Komul v, Umashankar 690 

730n, Kamalakshi v. Ramasami 9720 

Maharaja of Kolhapur v. Sundaram Kandasami v Doraisami 592n, 

972. Kanhaiya Lal v. Gaura 608n, 

Malubhai v. Sursangji 631, Kantawa v. Sangaagowda 724n. Manekial v. Mohanlal 5070. Kashibai v. Moreshwar 752n, 

Manikbai v. Gokuldas 693n, Kasbibai v, Tatia 6780. 

Manikchand v. Hiralal 631, Kesarlal v. Jagubhai 7300, 

Manilal Rewadat v, Bai Rewa 797n. Kesarsiogji v. Secretary of Stale 7580, I Manjanatb v. Narayan 634. 

760n. 

Mapki v. Kuaduo 7160, Keshav v. Bai Gandi 972n. 

Martaad v, Narayan 666, 6910, 6970. Kesserbai v. Valab 724n, 728n. 

Marudayi v. Doraisami 7000. Khimji v. Chunilal 4250, 

Masit Ullab v. Damodar Prasad 444n Khunni Lal v. Gobind 616n 

Matbura v, Esu 9710, 972a. Kisanji v. Lakshmi 808. 

Meenakshi v, Appakutti 7080. Kojiyadu v. Laksbmi 717a. 

Motharam v. Revacband 5840, 

XI. 

History of Dharmasastra 

Minakshi v. Ramapada 683n. 

| Parvati v. Ganpatrao $10, Mobandas v. Krisbpabai 7310 

Pauliem v. Pauliem 584n. Mohesh v. Satrughan 631. 

Peda Venkappa v. Sreenivasa 4450. Moniram v. Kerry 707n. 

Pedda Amani v. Zemindar of Marunga Moriarty v. London, Chatham and puri 656 

Dover Railway Co. 349a. I 

Perrazu v, Subbarayudu 699. Moro v. Ganesh 5910, 6320, 

Pichuvayyan v. Subbayyan 6810. Mothoormohun v. Sourendro 574n. Ponappa v. Pappuvayyangar 621n. Mubammad Husain v. Kishwa Naodao. Pradjivan v. Motiram 622n. 

5761, 5770. 

Pranjivandas v. Iccharam 634, Mulji v. Cursandas 7270. 

Prithigaogji v. Umedsingji 631. Murugayi v. Viramkali 7080 

Prosanno v. Sarat 798n. Muthuvayyangar v. Thiruvangudammal Putlabai v. Mahadu 667. 

6888. 

R. v. Mylius 3360. Nagaliagam v. Ramchandra 577n. Rachava v. Kalingappa 751n. Nagalutchnee Ummal v. Gopoo 816n. Radhabai v. Gopal 816n Nagiadas v. Bachoo 657, 699n, 

Radba Mohun v. Hardai Bibi 676. Nagubai v. Moagbibai 585n. 

Raghuraj Chandra v. Subhadra 691n, Nalinaksha v. Rajanikaata 739n. 

6940. Nanchand v. Bapusaheb 425n 

Rabi v. Govind 6010, 6020, 8099, Nanuram v Radbabai 6061, 

Raj Kishen Singh v. Ramjoy 9710 Narain Das v. Tirlok 8010. 

Raja v. Krishnabbat 972n. Narasimbarao v. Antaji 445. 

Raj Nandini v. Aswini Kumar 675, Narayan v. Lakshman 727n, 8010. Raja Mukund v. Jagannath 6810. Narayan v. Shankar 634. 

Raja Ramrao v. Raja of Pittapur 803n, Narayan v. Venkatacharya 448n, 

805: Narhar v. Bhau 7960. 

Rajah Muthu Ramlinga v. Perianaya Narhari v. Bhimrao 9710. 

gum 821. Narotam v. Napka 452n. 

Rajanikaata v. Sajani Sundari 806n. Natba v, Cbotalal 599n, 6180. 

Rajaninath v. Nitai 6020, 809n. Nathubhai v. Chhaganlal 507n 

Raje Vyaokatrao v. Jayavaatrao 672. Nathubhai v. Hansgavri 5880. 

Rakhmabai v. Radhabai 6700, Naval Singh v. Bhagwan Singh 5960. Ramalinga v. Sivachidambara 5930. Neelkisto v. Beer Chunder 631, 970n. Ramanand v. Rai Kishori 7170. Nehalo v. Kishen 707n. 

Ramanand v. Surgiani 7240. Nilnoney v. Banesbur 810n. 

Ramappa v. Sithammal 700n. Niagareddi v, Lakshmawa 8100, 

Ramchandra v, Gopal 683n. Nirman v. Fateh 5920, 

Ramchandra v. Haomaot 603. 

Ramchandra v. Shankar 672. Omichand v. Barker 3360, 969n. 

Ramchandra v. Vinayak 7570, Palaniappa v. Alayyan 607n 

Ramdas v. Baldevadasji 7650. Pancbanon Roy v. Fazlur Rahman Rameshwar v. Lachmi 571n, 

970n. 

Ramji v, Ghamau 670, 821. Pandhariaath v. Govind 710. 

Ramkrishna v. Chimoaji 683. Pandit Suraj Narain v. Iqbal Narain Ramkrisboa v. Shamrao 673, 674. 

362a. 

Ramkumar v. Bhagawaota 808n. Parshottam v. Venicband 970n. Ramlinga v. Narayan 6210. Parthasarathy v, Tiruvengada 5880. Ramnarasu v. Buchampa 8100. 

Table of Cases Cited 

Somasundaram v. Vaithilinga 765n. Soundararajan v. Arubachalam 562n. Sri Balusu Gurulingswami v. Sri Balusu 

676. Sri Ragbunadha v. Sri Brozo 638n, Srimati Hemagini v, Kedarnath 606. Srischandra Nandy v. Baijnath 3250. Subba v. Ganas 57in, Subbaraya v. Ramasami 801n, Subbarayana v. Subbakka 804. Subbayya v. Anaot 620n. Subhadi v. Nawab 970. Subramania v. Valu 809n. Subramaniam v, Arunachalam 606n. Supdarabai v. Jayawant 425n. Sundrabai v. Haomant 684. Sundrabai v. Shiv Narayan 0220. Surabala Devi v. Sudhir 681n. Suraj Bunsi y. Sheo Proshad 450. Surampalli v. Surampalli 8040, Surendra v. Bholanath 679A. 

Ramraov, Yeshwantrao 631, 9710. Ram Gopal v. Narain 7980. Ram. Nundun v. Maharani Janki 631. Ram Saran v. Mababir 072. Rao Balwant Singh. v. Rani Kishori 

640. Ratilal v. Motilal 9710. Reade vi Krishna 574. Reg. v. Karsan Goja 972n. Roshan Singh v. Balwant Singh 809n. Rukhab v. Chunilal 698n, Sadu v. Baiza 602n. Sahebgauda v, Shiddangouda 699n, Sahu Ram v. Bhup Singh 822. Sakharam v. Balkrishna 758n. Sakharam v. Sitabai 727n, 728n, 796n. Salemma v. Lutchmana 795. Sambasivam v. Secretary of State 765n. Saṅkaralinga v, Rajeshwar 971n. Saradambal v. S. Subbarama 605n. Saratullal v. Pran Nath 826n. Satyabhama v. Kesavacharya 808n. Saundanappa v. Shivbasawa 4270. Saundararajan v. Arunachalam 602n. Savitribai v. Luxmibai 803n, 810n. Sayamlal y, Saudamini 674n. Secretary of State for India V, 

Debendra Lal 325n. Seelam Nagamma v, Reddam 7589. Seethai v. Nachiar 7240, Sellam v. Chinnammal 707n. Sha Chamanlal v. Doshi Ganesia 709. Shalig Ram v. Chiranjit Lal 785a.. Shamsing v, Shantabai 667. Shankar v. Kasbinatb 730n. Sbantaram v. Waman 588. Sharadacandra v. Shantabai 666. Sheo Narain v. Janki Prasad 608n, Sheo Shankar v, Debi Sahai 782n. Sbesgiri v. Gireva 708n, Shibprasad v. Prayag Kumari 576, 

97Go. Shivaji v. Datu 574n, Shivajirao v. Vasantrao 5960. . Sbivial v. Bai Saṅkli 808n, .. Shyama Charan v. Sri Charan 693n. Sitabai v. Parvatibai 683. 

Sitabai v. Vasantrao 7970. 

Tahaldayi v. Gaya Pershad 7240. Tara v, Krishna 7180, 8010. Thakoor Jeeboath v, Court of Wards 

659, Thakur Rab Prasad v. Chhotay 

Munwan 810n, Tirkangauda v. Shivappa 685. Toshanpal Singb v. District Judge of 

Agra 4610. Totawa v. Basawa 7160. Trailokya Nath v. Radha 718n. Tukaram v. Babaji 678a. Tukaram v. Dinkar 602n. Tukaram v, Narayana 7980. Tukaram v. Ramchandra 6980. Tulsbiram v, Behari Lal 6640. Uji v. Hathi 9720. Umaid Bahadur v. Udoicband 7560. Uma Shankar Moitro v. Kali Komul 

6900. United Provinces v, Kanhaiya Lal 756. Valubai v. Govind 688a. Vaman v. The Collector of Tbana 388a. Vaman v. Vasudev 586. Vannia Kono v, Vandicbi 9710, Vasudev v. Vamoaji 8830. 

xlii 

History of Dharmatastra 

11. 

7250. 

Vasudev v. Venkatesh 5940. Vasudevaa v. Secretary of State 660. Vellaiyappa v. Natarajan 809n, 810. Venkata Narasimha v, Rangayya 6930. Venkatarayudu v. Sivaram Krishnayya 

622n, Ven kayyamma v. Venkataramana 

yamma 577n, Venku v. Mahalinga 972n. Virangauda v. Yellappa 756. Viraragava v. Ramalinga 681n. Viraswami v. Appaswami 45in. Viswasundara v. Somasundara 684, Vithabai v. Pandu 602n, Vithal v, Anant 972n. Vithal v, Balu 793n, Vithal v. Prahlad 443n, 608n. Vithappa v. Savitri 716n. Vithu v. Govind 708, Vyakunta v. Government of Bombay 

329n, Vyas Chimanlal v. Vyas Ramchandra 

676, 678, 796n, 

818. 

708a. 

603. 

42 Bom. 136 

7100. 46 Bom, 213 

327n, 48. Bom, 203 

763a. 60 Bom. 311 

450. 31 Bom L. R. 199 

3270, 31 Bom. L. R. 1030 47 Bom, L. R,5 6020, 7630, 814. 1 Cal, 1 

6020. 6 Cal, 119 19 Cal, 91 

602a. 28 Cal. 194 

6020. 39 Cal. 862 

4470. 47 Cal. 274 

327n I. L, R. (1940) Cal, 415 6 1. A, 88 

4500, 7 1. A. 115 171. A. 128 

602. 26 I. A. 113 

6770, 682, 41 1. A. 290 

7250, 758. 42 I. A. 208 

7510, 51 I. A, 129 

4490, 53 I. A, 163 

763a. 58 I. A, 402 5 Mad, H, C. R. 150 

581n. 1 Mad, 306 

6029. 4 Mad, 250 

581n. 8 Mad, 290 

7100. 11 Mad. 287 

7600. 23 Mad, 16 

601. 27 Mad. 300 

5790, 30 Mad. 406 

7600, 31 Mad. 250 

427a, 34 Mad. 68 

6029. 37 Mad. 458 

447, 38 Mad. 556 

6220. 39 Mad, 298 

.876. 40 Mad, 925 

574a. 42 Mad. 711 

450. 53 Mad 84 53 Mad, 549 

4278, 58 Mad. 126 

6220. 58 Mad. 238 A. I. R. (1945) Mad. 327 5920. 5 Patna 646 

710a. 23 Patna 599 

5760, P.J. (for 1874 ) p. 250 8678, 

Walbai v. Heerbai 683. Waman v. Balaji 972n. Wodeyar v. Ganapati 9710. 

Yadao v. Namdeo 670. Yamunabai v. Magubai 806n, Yashvantrao v. Kashibai 8100, 8110. 14 All. 67 

677n. 17 All, 523 

760n. 28 All. 458 

600n. 29 All. 667 

577n. 31 All. 454 

760n. 54 All. 698 

758n. 1 Bom. 121 

4520. 2 Bom. 573 

763n. 4 Bom, 37 

601, 602. 5 Bom. 99 

3120. 12 Bom. 26 

7630, 16 Bom, 29. 

570n. 26 Bom. 163 

7630, 26 Bom, 206 

450. 32 Bom. 348 

4470, 32 Bom. 562 

602. 

619a. 

7600, 

## Additions and Corrections

ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS 

(A few misprints due to the loss or displacement of such loose parts as anusvāras have not been specified, since they can be easily detected ), 

Page 

Line or note 

22 

n.24 

57 

n. 70 1.3 1.31 

n. 184 1.16 

, 147 

read विष्णुधर्मसूत्र III. 95%; read शान्ति 59 for शान्ति 9 The verse दुष्टस्य दण्डः &c. occurs also 

in वराहमिहिर' योगयात्रा 2,33 read सर्वकल्मष read 'Santiparva (56. 45-46). read 'option for read 'Sabara' in line 3 Add 'Br. Sam. 23. 2 is: हस्तविशालं 

कुण्डकमाधिकृत्याम्बुप्रमाणनिर्देशः । पञ्चाशत्पल माढकमनेन मिनुयाजले पतितम् ॥. उत्पल explains 'हस्तविशालं कुण्डकं वर्षति देवे संस्थाप्य तत्र यज्जलं पतति तन्मापयेत् । तद्यदि पलशतद्वयं भवति तदा द्रोणो वृष्टः'. On Br. Sarn. 21. 32 उत्पल quotes a verse of पराशर 'समे विशाङ्गलानाहे द्विचतुष्कालोच्छिते। भाण्डे वर्षति संपूर्णे ज्ञेयमाढकवर्षणम् ॥'. This shows the dimensions of a vessel used as a rainguage. । read in line 3 राजधर्मको, read Rajadharmakaustubha'. 

182, 

183 

183 

n. 230 1. 34 1.38 n. 250 n, 306 

193 

227 

read संभृतानि कनककरितुरग० add at end 'Compare योगयात्रा 5.15 "एकतश्च सकलानि निमित्तान्येकतश्च मनस परिशद्धिःचेतसोऽस्ति सहयानरणे भी स्तोऽपि विजयाजयहेतुः ॥ read 'Manu VIII. 1.' for 'Manu 

VIII. 1, 

242 

, 1.14 

xliy 

History of Dharmasasira 

Page 

258 

Line or note 

n. 335 1.20 

265 

n. 395 

379 382 

1.6 

405 414 

last line 

n.669 

423 

n.690 

533 

n. 982 

538 

1. 995 

542 

n. 1009 

570 586 588 

n. 1069 n. 1104 n. 1111 n, 1142 

605 

read in last line स्मृतिचं. read 'padas' read सभ्यैः 

read patram...pralta ' put a full stop after 'hanged', 

read ऋणमस्मिन् read गुणैर्व्यवस्था should we read वधमकुर्वन् for वधं 

कुर्वन् ? read in first line द्युतं read in second line aa 

read पैतामहे read in line 9 च for ज. read in line दुर्गादीत्याह put a full stop after बौधायन in 1. 5. read in line 9 निरिन्द्रिया ह्यमन्त्राश्च read न त्वद्यत्वे अनुष्ठेया read in line 1 एक एवौरसः and in 

line 2 वि. र. read गौणपुत्राणां read in line 2 कुर्वन्न add at the end For the words शूर्पण 

जुहोति शूर्पण ह्यशनं क्रियते' vide शतपथ ब्राह्मण II.5.2.23%; vide ते. ब्रा. I. 6.4 for two वेदिs in वरुणप्रघास and बौ. श्री. 

5.5. Add at end ' For अर्धम...बहिर्वेदि com 

pare तै.सं. VI.6.4 and बौ.श्री.सू. 4.2. read (Sakuntala Act VI). rsad पत्नीनामंशभागित्वम् . read her deceased sonless and 1 geparated husband's wealth'. 

627 

n. 1197 n. 1235 

651 

659 

n. 1248 n. 1250 n. 1277 

677 

695 

n. 1321 

702 

706 

1.7 

n. 1349 1. 15 

Additions anni Corrections 

xiv 

Line or note 

Page 751 

1. 30 

776 

781 

n. 1499 n. 1509 n. 1561 

804 

read after 'British rule' the words 

'the widows of gotraja sapiṇdas'. read in l. 2 rapat read in last line स्वातन्त्र्येण Add at the end 'Recently the 

Indian Legislature passed Act XIX of 1946 which confers on Hindu married women the rights to separate residence and main tenance as against the busbands 

in certain circumstances ', read 'mother' read in line ✓ 'Institute for 

Society'. read 'naugamanabhave'.. 

846 

1. 28 n. 1762 

897 

936 

last line 
