+++
title = "25 Causes of Disappearance of Buddhism"

+++

CHAPTER XXV 

Causes of the Disappearance of Buddhism from India. 

At the beginning of Chapter XXIV (pp. 913-14, n 1448) above, it was stated that the Purānas had a large share in bringing about the final disappearance of Buddhism from India, the land of its birth. The disappearance of Buddhism from India was complete and seemed to be sudden and is a com plex problem. No single cause, nor even a few causes oan fully account for this phenomenon. A combination of causes, both internal and external, must have been in operation for a pretty long time to bring about this remarkable event. It may be admitted that some of the causes are more or less conjectural. In the first quarter of the 5th century A. D. Fa-Hian found Buddhism in a flourishing condition in India, while in the first half of the 7th century A.D. Yuan Chwang appears to say that the decline of Buddhism had set in. It-sing found Buddhism very much on the decline in the beginning of the 8th century A.D. An attempt will be made here to discuss briefly the goveral causes that have been put forward by scholars for explaining the almost total disappearance of Buddhism from India. A few of the contributions bearing on this subjeot may be noted here. 'Religions of India' by A. Barth, translated by J. Wood (1882) pp. 133-139; Journal of Pali Texts Society (1896 pp. 87-92) on *Persecution of Buddhists in India' by Rhys Davids; Kern's 'Manual of Buddhism'(in the German Grundriss pp. 133-134); 

Buddhist India' by Rhys Davids (1903, pp. 157-158, 819 ); I. H. Q. Vol. IX pp. 361–371 (where the causes of the disappear ance of Buddhism emphasized by M. M. Haraprasad Shastri are enumerated ); "The sum of History' by René Grousset, trans lated by A. and H. Temple Patterson pp. 101-105 (Tower Bridge Publications, 1951); The Decline of Buddhism in India' by Dr. R. O. Mitra (1954), particularly pp. 125-164; 'Life and Teaching of Buddha' by Devamitta Dharmapala (G. A. Natosan & Co., Madras, 1938); 2500 years of Buddhism' edited by Prof. P, V. Bapat, 1956 pp. 360-376; The Path of the Buddha' by Prof. Kenneth W. Morgan pp. 47-50 (New York, 1956); 'How. Buddhism left India' by N. J. O'Connor, Ralph Fletcher Seymour, Chicago (1957). 

1004 

History of Dharmadāstra (Seo, V, Ch. XXV 

Before Simion from India D 

r eat reform 

Before setting out the main causes of the virtual disappear ance of Buddhism from India certain gonoral points have to be emphasized. Buddha was only a great reformer of the Hindu religion as practised in his time. He did not feel or claim that he was forming a new religion, nor did he renounce the Hindu religion and all its practices and beliefs. The Buddha referred to the Vedas and Hindu sages with honour in some of his sermons. He recognised the importance of Yogic practices and meditation. His teaching took over several beliefs current among the Hindus in his day such as the doctrine of Karma and Rebirth and cosmological theories. A substantial portion of the teaching of Buddha formed part of the tenets of the Upanisadio period. At the time when he was born there were two main currents of thoughts and practices prevalent among the people, one being the path of sacrifices to Gods and the other being the path of moral endeavour, self-restraint and spiritual goal. It has been shown above (pp. 917-918) how the Upaniṣads assigned a lower position to the Vedas and the sacrifices enjoined therein and how spiritual knowledge after cultivating high ethical qualities was deemed greater than sacrifices. The Upaniṣads first began by symbolical interpretation of Vedic sacrifices, as for example in Bṛ. Up. I. 1. 1, where Uṣas, Sūrya and Samvatsara are said to be respectively the head, the eye and the soul of the sacrificial horse or as in Chān. Up II. 2. 1-%, where the five parts of the Sāman employed in a sacrifice are aymbolically identified with earth, fire, sky, sun and heaven. Then they proceed to belittle the Veda as mere name and as much inferior to brahmaridyā (e. g. Br. Up. IV. 4. 21, I. 4.10, Chān. Up. VII. 1-4, Mundaka I. 1. 4-5. It is generally held by all Sanskrit scholan that at least the oldest Upaniṣads like the Bșhada ranyaka and the Chandogya are earlier than Buddha, that they do not refer to Buddha or to his teachings or to the pitakas. On the other hand, though in dozens of Suttas meetings of brāhmaṇas and Buddha or his disciples and missionaries are reported they almost always seem to be marked by courtesy on both sides. No meetings are recorded in the early Pali Texts or brahmanical Texts about Sākyans condemning the tenets of ancient brahma nism or about brāhmaṇas censuring the Bauddha heterodoxy. Besides, in all those meetings and talks, the central Upaniṣad conception of the immanence of brahma is never attacked by Buddha or by the early propagators of Buddhism. What Buddha says may be briefly rendered as follows: "Even so have 1, O Bhikkhus, seen an ancient path, an ancient road followed by 

Buddha proclaimed only an ancient path 

1005 

rightly enlightened persons of former times. And what, O Bhikkhus, is that ancient path, that ancient road, followed by the rightly enlightened ones of former times? Just this very Noble Eightfold Path, viz. right views...&o. This, O Bhikkhus, is that ancient path, that ancient road, followed by the rightly enlightened ones of former times. Along that (path) I have gone and while going along that path, I have fully come to know, old age and death. Having come to know it fully, I have told it to the monks, the nuns, the lay followers, men and women; this brahmacarya is prosperous, flourishing, widespread, widely known, has become popular and made manifest well by gods and men."1639 It will be noticed that the Noble Eightfold Path which the Buddha put forward as the one that would put an end to misery and suffering is here expressly stated to be an ancient path trod by ancient enlightened men. Buddha does not claim that he was unique, but claimed that he was only one of a series of Enlightened men and stressed that the moral qualities which he urged men to cultivate belonged to antiquity. In the Dhamma pada and the Suttanipāta (Mahāvagga, Vāsottha sutta) the truly virtuous man is spoken of as brābmana: "I speak of him as brāhmaṇa, who causes no harm (or evil) in body, word and thought, who is guarded as regards these three SOUTCON"; neither by matted hair nor by lineage, nor by caste, does one become a brahmana'; 'that man in whom there is truth and righteousness is blessed and is a brāhmana'; 'him who does not cling to desires (or pleasures) as water does not stick to a lotus leaf or as a mustard grain (does not stiok) on the top of an awl, I call a brāhmana. '1640 Moreover, it does not appear that at any time 

1639, Vide rate (P. T. S.), part II (Nidānavagga) edited by M. Leon Feer pp. 106-107 paragraphs 21-33, a few sentences from which may be quoted here : 'gastar malt for et gori Art Schutz geeing सम्मासंडदेहि अनुपातं ॥ कसमो च सो भिक्खवे मग्गो पुराणजसो"अनुपातो । अयमेव अगिको मग्गो । सेय्यथापि समाविति। "अयं रखो भिक्सवे पुराणमग्गो अनुयातो। अनु. गछि। अनुगच्छन्तो जरामरणं आभिन्नाति । "वद् अभिनाय आचिनि भिक्खून भिक्खुनीनं उपासकानं उपासिकान । तयिदं भिक्खवे ब्रह्मचरिय इद्धं चेव फीतं च पित्यारिक . बहुजन पृथभूतं याव देवमनुस्सेहि सुप्पकासित ति।" 

1640. यस कायेन वाचाय मनसा नथि दुक्कतं। संबु तीहि ठानेहि तमहं हमि ब्राह्मणम्॥ न जटाहि न गोतेन न जञ्चा होति बाह्मणो । यन्हि सचंच धम्मो च सोमुखी सो च प्राह्मणो। वारि पोक्खरपसेव आरग्गेरिव सासवो। यो न लिम्पति कामे तमहं भूमि पाहणम् ॥ धम्मपद verses 391, 393,401 (of Dr. P. L. Vaidya's edition of 1934 in Devanagari type); Trufa (HET97, STRESORT) bas the last verse. With the verse' da jaṭāhi 

(Continued on next page) 

1006 

History of Dharmaśāstra (Sec. V. Ch. XXV 

the whole of India or even large portions of it were completely Buddhistio. The people of India as a whole were always Hindus. 1641. There were many millions of people at all times who professed Hinduism and not Buddhism. Besides, even when Buddhism secured the patronage of emperors like Asoka, Kaniska and Harṣa Buddhism was mainly restricted to mons steries and schools and great tolerance prevailed. For example, Harṣa's father was a great devotee of the Sun and he himself is described in his Banskhera and Madhuban plates as a great devotee of Siva, though his elder brother Rājyavardhana is described as parumasaugata (a great devotee of Buddha) and he appears to have shown favour to the Buddhist pilgrim (Yuan Chwang ),1642 

Some recent authors like Prof. K. W. Morgan hold that the most important causes of the disappearance of Buddhism were decline of vigour in the Sangha, the Moslem invasions and the opposition of the Hindu community ("The Path of the Buddha' p. 48). 

There is a good deal of truth in A. Coomaraswamy's con. tention that the more profound is one's study of Buddhism and Brabmanism the more difficult it becomes to distinguish between 

(Continued from last page) &c. compare AETATEA, gate 216.14-15 TETT Å Hra Frantua: 1 a TEDAE AO A TE PEST: II. Vide H. of Db. vol. II p. 101 for other passages from the Great Epic similar to these. With the verse at i 

89&c. compare Chāo. Up. IV. 14.3 * 497 gemacht SITT a figurant geht fara ni ed 12gsea gra and Gita V. 10 'Pescant a \# grua quy ARTTHETI, 

1641. Vide for a similar view expressed by a great French savant and Sanskrit scbolar Prof. L. Rebou in 'Religions of ancient Iodia (University of London, 1953 ) p. 100. 

1642. For Banskbera Plate of the year 22 (of the Harșa era ) i. e. 628–29 A. D., vide E. 1, vol. IV pp. 210-211 and for the Madhubad plate of Harsa in the year 25 i. e. 631-32 A. D., vide E. I. vol. I pp 72-73 (Bühler) and E. I. vol. VII pp. 157-158 (Kielborn). Yuan Chwang doos not mention tbat Rājyavardhana was a great devotee of Buddha but he tries to paiot Harsa as full of faith in Buddba from the beginning and Darrates a fictitious story describing how Harsa was prevented from morot ing the throne and induced to take the title Kumāra by a Bodhisattva who miraculously appeared to him in return for his worship This shows that the accounts by the 'Master of the Law' must sometimes be taken with a pinch of salt. Vide Watters on 'Yuan Chwang's Travels in India' (London, 1904 ) vol. I p. 343 for this story. 

Coomaraswamy on Buddhism 

1007 

the two or to say in what respects Buddhism is really unortho doz (vide his 'Hinduism and Buddhism' p: 452). Buddha and his successors really attacked some popular varieties of Brahma. nism. Mrs. Rhys Davids in her lecture on The relations between Early Buddhism and Brahmanism' (published in I. H.Q. Vol. X. pp. 274-286) endeavours to show that the Tripitakas do not refer to rupture with brāhmaṇas and that what Buddha proached was in agreement with the central tonet of immanonce in the Brahmanism of the day. Buddha agreed (or at least had no quarrel) with the Upaniṣad teaching about high moral endeavour being a necessary pre-requisite for brahma realization and mokṣa (as in Bṛ. Up. IV. 4. 23 'tasmād-evamvic.chānto dānta upratas-titikṣuḥ samāhito bhūtyā ātmanyevātmānam paśyati', Katha Up. I. 2. 23, 1. 3, 8, 9, 13, 15, Praśna Up. I. 15–16, Mundaka 1. 2. 12-13). 

The main matters of controversy between Buddha and the Hindu religious and philosophical system current in his time are generally held to bave been caste divisions and pride of caste, the absolute authoritativeness of the Vedas and the great importance attached to sacrifices. 1642a Buddha asserted that righteousness and wisdom were the best, he did not expressly deny the existence of God but proclaimed that it was unnecessary to be definite nor did he pronounce his definite views on such questions as whether the world is eternal or non-eternal, since according to him, to cogitate on such points would be " a thicket of theorizing, wilderness of theorizing, the tangle of theorizing, the bondage and shackles of theorizing ...... nor would it conduce to aversion, passionlessness, tranquillity, peace, illumination and nirvania." 1643 Buddha did not think much 

1642 a. Barth in 'Religions of India' (pp. 125-126 ) scouts the theory that the institution of the Sangha and primitive Buddhism were a reaction against the regime of caste and the spiritual yoke of the brahmanas and calls that theory 'a fiction of romance.' 

1643. Vide Majjhima-nikāya (Cūla-Māluṅkyasutta and Aggi-vaccagotta sutta) ed. by V. Trenkner, vol. I suttas 63 and 72 pp. 431 and 486 निधिदाय न विरागाय न निरोधाय न उपसमाय न अभिमाय न सम्बोधाय न नियानाय 

Hirafa. These very words occur in the Potthapada-sutta of the Digha nikāya when Buddba was asked by Potthapada whether the world was permanent or otherwise, whether it was without end or not, whether the soul ( jiva ) and body wore different and be replied tbat he did not expound those matters because they served po purpose and did not lead to pirvana (Pali Texts Society, vol. I pp. 188-189 para 28). 

1008 



(Beo. V, Oh. XXV 

of worship or prayer. Acoording to him, what mattered was the deliverance of man from BOITOW and suffering and the attainment of nirvana 1613 ( which state he did not care to define clearly and precisely). The original doctrine (called hinayāna, 

the lesser way or vehicle') held that the experience of enlighten ment and nirvana can be secured by human beings in this very 

life if they follow the path chalked out by Buddha. 

The causes that have been advanced from time to time by scholars for the total disappearance of Buddhism from India must now be dealt with, (1) Persecution is alleged by some scholars as at least one of the main causes. King Pusyamitra of the Sunga dynasty is charged with having proclaimed that whoever would bring to him the head of a śramanu would receive one hundred dināras; 1644 Mihirakula, king of Kashmir, 

1643 a. The word ' Nirvana ' literally means 'blown out, extinguished, or become cooled'. Takiog the view most favourable to Buddha's teaching, it implies the blowing out or extinction of the fires of kama (lust or desire). krodha (aoger or ill-will), moha (ignorance or stupidity) and transfor mation of these into moral purity, goodwill (or charity ) aad wisdom. It is not like the Biblical Heaven. It is a state of perfect enlightenment, peace and bliss, attainable not merely after death, but in this very life and on this earth. It is really indescribable as stated in the Pali Udāga, VIII "un. become, unborn, unformed &c. ' and resembles the words used in speaking of brahma as' aeti neti' in Bṭ. Up. II. 3.6, IV. 2. 4, IV. 4. 22, IV. 5. 15. 

1644. The words in the Asokāvadāna No. 29 (the Divyāvadāda ed, by Cowell and Neil, Cambridge, 1886, p. 434 )'n goufen 

for प्रधातयन् मस्थितः। स यावच्छाकलमनुमाप्तः । तेनाभिहितम् । यो मे श्रमणशिरो दास्यति तस्याई Parcare FAUTI "Pet goufaait haramiai Ara: FRIENT: ". Pasya mitra is said by most authorities to be a Sunga and was called senāni in the Parāpas, jo Hargacarita (VI) and in the Ayodhya Inscription (in E, I. vol. 20 p. 54 ), while the above avadana calls bim Maurya. This shows either the ignorance of the writer of the Divyāvadāda (which is a late work) or the text itself may be incorrect or corrupt. Vide Pro. of the 6th Indian History Congress ( Aligarh, 1943) pp. 109–116 where Mr. N. N. Ghosh propounds the theory that Pusyamitra did persecute Buddbists, though his successors did not; on the other hand Dr, Ray Chaudhari io 'Political History of India' (5th ed.) does not agrec to the theory of persecution by gorafores. In the Āryamaõjusri-mūla-kalpa (T. S. S, part III, 53rd chapter pp. 619-620 ) it is stated in a prophetic vein that a certain king called Gomi makhya (and algo Gomisanda) extending his rule from East India to Kashmir will make Buddha's śāsana (system) disappear, will destroy vihāras and kill monks'. K, P. Jayaswal in 'Imperial History of India in a Sanskrit text' (p. 19 ) holds that Gomimakhya is a concealed name for 

( Continued on next page)Mihirakula persecuted Buddhists 

1009 

is accused by Yuan Chwang (or more correctly, Hsuan Tsang according to some modern writers) with having overthrown Buddhist topos in Gandhāra, with destruction of monasteries and the slaughter of myriads of Buddhists (vide 'In the footsteps of Buddha' by René Grousset pp. 119–120 on Mihirakula, the Indian Attila); king Saśānka is said by Yuan Chwang to have destroyed the Bo-tree (Bodhidruma), replaced the image of Buddha by one of Maheśvara and to have destroyed the religion of Buddha and dispersed the order (vide Beal's 'Buddhist Records of the Western World' Vol. II. pp. 118, 12% and Watters on 'Yuan Chwang's Travels' Vol. II, pp. 115–116); king Sudhanvan is supposed to have issued at the instigation of Kumārila 1644& a proclamation to take effect from the Himalayas to Cape Comorin (which is palpably absurd) that he would put to death any servant of his who did not kill the Buddhists. These instances are carefully examined by no less a scholar than Rhys Davids in the Journal of the Pali Texts Society for 1896 (pp 87-92). After adverting to the facts that there is nothing about persecution in the Pali Pitakas, that the tone of Pali books is throughout appreciative of brāhmaṇas, that no details are given and that hardly any names of persons suffering by 

(Continued from last page) Pugyamitra, that the portion above quoted was written about 800 A. D. and was translated into Tibetan ia 1060 A, D. (Intro. p. 3). Vide 'Pasyamitra and the Sunga Empire' by Ramaprasad Chanda in I.H.g. vol. V pp. 393-407 at p. 397 ( for the concluding sentences of the Divyāvadāna in English) and pp. 587-613 and a recent paper on 'Pusyamitra Sunga and Baddhists' by Hari Kishore Prasad in JBRS, vol. 40 pp. 29–38. 

1644 a. Vide also · Buddhist India" by Rhys Davids pp. 318-320 (5th ed. of 1917, the first being of 1903 ) about persecution and Life and Teaching of Buddha' by Devamitta Dharmapala p. 7 about Kumarila and Saṅkara having waged only a polemic war ead aothing more. The Tantra vārtika of Kumārila also suggests that the Buddhists were afraid of polemic skirmishes with the Mimārsakas and that, while stating in one breath that everything is momentary, the Buddhists at the same time foolishly boasted that their sacred texts also were eternal, borrowing that idea from the Vedic doctrines; wat hier: Tiday: 1 Parry GarraSHTET 

वेतनम् ॥ p. 235: तत्र शाक्येः प्रसिद्धापि सर्वक्षणिकवादिता। स्यज्यते घेदसिद्धान्ताजप PalacgATTHU II p. 236, Vide nota ( 2011) which will show that Kūmārila was prepared to admit the nsefulness of Baddha's teachings up to a certain point. Other literary works also show that it was a polemic war e. g. the 

THUT of uny (not later than 6th century A. D.) says rewiata HUTHU NOTTERHEIFA:' (p. 144, Hall's ed.). 

8, D. 197. 

1010 

History of Dharmatāstra (Sec. V, Ch. XXV 

persecution are mentioned, he asserts that he does not believe in these stories, but adds that he does not go 80 far as to maintain that there is no truth at all in the legend about Puṣyamitra (but judgment must be reserved in view of the text in the avadāna being corrupt and the author of it being grossly ignorant). As to the legend about Sudhanvan and Kumārila ho holds that of all the cases of alleged persecution this is the weakest and that it is no more than boastful and rhetorical exaggeration. 1645 Rhys Davide emphasizes that the adherents of both faiths so diametrically opposed to each other lived in continuous peace side by side for a thousand years, that this redounds to the credit of the whole Indian people from the time of Asoka 

1645. In the T rafare of anyaan it is stated (1. 56 and 59 ) that king Sodba vad was an avatāra of Indra aod Kumārila of Skanda (wbo is also known as Kumāra). The order of Sudhanvan is couched in that work as follows: T ai air air glaiareutati IT water darrera 

0 1 7 9 \# En yearumairag: \# (51 Praha I. 92–93). This seems to be a palpably absurd legend, No king in ancient India, much lesa one called Sadbanvā, ruled over the vast territory from the Himalayas to Rānesvara. Further, it may be noted that the order, supposing one was issued, was addressed only to the king's servants and not to one and all. The Saṅkaradigvijaya (XV. 1) states that when Saṅkarācārya started on a pilgrimage to Rāneśvara king Sodbanvan accompanied him. Madhava cārya, being blinded by his zeal to glorify his hero to the utmost, goes og heaping one legeod on another and casts all history and chronology to the wiods. For example, he narrates that Acārya Abhinavagupta (a great Saiva and Taotrika teacher) was vanqoished by Saṅkara la disputations (XV. 158) and that Abhinavagupta practised black magic against the great Acārya. From Abbioavagupta's own works it appears that bis literary activity lay between 980 to 1020 A. D. (vide the author's History of Sanskrit Poetics', 1951, pp. 231-232), while no scholar woold place Saṅkarācārya later than 800 A. D. Mādbavācārya also says (XV. 137 ) that Saṅkara vanquisbed by his arguments Sriharja, author of Khagdanakhaqda. khadya, who could not be vanquisbed by Guru, Bhatta and Udayanı. Śribarna fourished about the end of the 12th century A. D. Taranath ja his . History of Buddhism ' says ' It was probably about this time that the terrible enemies of the Buddhists, Saṅkarācārya and his disciple Bhatta cārya appeared, the former in Bengal and the latter in Orissa. A short tlmo after the Buddhists were persecated in the South by Kumārallla and Kaṇādararu; here mention is made of the Baddbist king Sālivābanı, thonga the Buddhists relate that in the end Dharmakirti triumphed in the discot sion with Kumāralla, Sai karācārya or Bhattācārya &c. (I. A, vol. IV. P. 365). It will be aoticed how the account is altogether confused, Vido Dr. Mitra's 'Docline of Buddhism' p. 129. 

Rhys Davtds-on tolerance of Indian people 

1011 

downwards and that India never indulged in persecution in anyway approaching to the persecution of reforming Ohristiana by the orthodox Church or the persecution of Christians by the Roman authorities. Dr. R. O. Mitra in "Decline of Buddhism in India" (pp. 125–130) arrives at the same conclusion about the cases of persecution. Barth (in 'Religions of India' p. 136) admits that everything tends to prove that Buddhism became extinct from sheer exhaustion and that it is in its own inherent defects that we must seek for the causes of its disappearance. He prefaces this remark with the words 'the most reliable documents, coins and inscriptions, bear evidence of a tolerance exceptionally generous on the part of the civil powers' (p. 133) and illustrates this by examples. 16458 It should be noted that great Smrtikāras like Yājñavalkya laid down that when an Indian king reduced a kingdom to subjection, it was the conqueror's duty to honour the usages, the transactions and family tradi tions of the conquered country and to protect them. Asoka, though himself a believer in Buddha's teachings, shows great 

1645 a. यस्मिन्देशे य आचारो व्यवहारः कुलस्थितिः । तथैव परिपाल्योऽसौ या Eyrra: ll. Nothing is gained by a total denial of even sporadic cases of religious persecution and vandalism. But such cases are very few and their very paucity emphasizes and illuminates the great religious tolerance of the Indian people for more than two thousand years. One interesting instance is found in an inscription from Ablur published in E. I. vol. V pp. 213 ff ( et p. 243 ), where the story is told of an intense devotee of Saivism named Ekāntada Rāma, who, in a controversy with the Jainas of Huligere ( Lakṣmeśvara ) led by a village headman gamed Saṅkagaudā made a wager in a writing on palmyra leaf to the effect that he would cat his own head, place it at the feet of Somanātha in Huligere and have the head rostored after seven days and that, if he succeeded, the Jains were to give up their faith and God, Ekantada Rāma succeeded, but the Jainas refused to destroy the image of Jina, whereupon Rāma routed the horses and guards sent by the Jaidas, laid waste the Jaina shrine and built a big sira shrine there. The Jaigas complaioed to king Bijjala who sent for Rāma and questioned him. Rāma produced the writing containing the terms of the wager, but offered to perform the same feat. The Jainas were not prepared to face the same test again. Bijjala asked the Jainas to live peaceably with their neighbours, gave a jayapatra (document of Rāma's success) and granted a village to the temple of Somapatha. It is clear that a Jain image was overthrown and a Saiva one was substituted by Rāma (leaving aside the superhuman feat ascribed to him ). Rāma is to be placed shortly boforo 1162 A, D. There is a great difference between local brawls as in the above case and a general policy by a community or a king of wholesale persecution. 

101 





tolerance by requiring honour to be shown to all beliefs and sects in his 12th Rook Ediot in the words 'Neither praising one's own seot nor blaming other sects should take place,' that 

other sects ought to be duly honoured in every case', that 'concord ( samavāya) alone is meritorious, that is they should both hear and honour each other's Dhamma' 1646 In the 7th Pillar Edict (Delhi-Topra p. 136 ) Aśoka proclaims that he appointed officers called Mahāmātras to look after the Sangha (the community or body of preaching Buddhist mendicants ), brāhmaṇas, Ajivikas, Nigganthas and all other pasandas (secta). India has been for thousands of years & country of nearly absolute tolerance, which is literally a religion, while European religiosity has nearly always been intolerant and, when not intolerant, it is tantamount to mental hostility or complete indifference. Most Indian religious people were and are ready to agree that there may be alternative approaches to the mystery of life and the salvation of the soul. Indians feel amused at the claims of millions of people that some prophet rovered by them has got the monopoly of the knowledge of God and the Hero after. This tolerance for differing tenets and cults persisted in India with rare exceptions throughout the long stretch of time from centuries before Asoka onwards till about 1200 A. D. when Moslems overran India. A few striking instances (both early and late ) may be cited here: (1) Khāravela again, & Jain king of Kalinga (2nd or 1st century B.C.), granted freedom from taxation to brāhmaṇas in the 9th year of his reigo (E. I. vol XX. p. 79 and 88); (2) The Nasik cave Ing. No. 10 records that Usavadāta, son-in-law of Ksatrapa Nabapāna of the Ksaharata lineage made very large gifts to gods and brahmanas on the 

1646. Vide ' Inscriptions of Asoka' ed. by Dr. Hultzsch (1925 ) pp. 20-21 for the text and traoslation of the Rock Edict from Girpar. Dr. Minakshi in ' Administration and Social life under the Pallavas' (Univer sity of Madras, 1938, pp. 170-172) after remarking that Pallava monarcb. as a class were tolerant towards all religions sects, points out that klag Pallavamalla iodulged in some barsb methods and persecution. Prof. Arnold Toynbee in East and West' (Oxford Uni. Press) points out that Christianity and Islam have seldom been content to follow the practice of "live and let live' and that both of them have been responsible for some of the bitterest conflicts and cruellest atrocities that have.disgraced history' (p. 49). Similarly, V. O. Vogt in 'Cult and Culture' condemns the unbending arrogance of Moslems and Christian Missionaries in their claims of revealed Agthority and laments that religion will meet disaster unless it universalizes its own conception of Revelation to embrace the future as well as the past (p. 70). 

Nasik Inscription of Ugavadāta 

jois 

bariks of sacred rivers and at Bharukacoha (modern Broach), Datapura, Govardhana and donated a field for feeding a congre gation of Buddhist monks (E. I. Vol. VIII p. 78); (3) The Gupta kings were generally devotees of Viṣṇu but they also made gifts to Buddhist monks 8. g. Gupta Inscription No. 5 ('Gupta Inscriptions' ed. by Fleet pp. 31-34 ) records a grant by Amrakārdava ( an officer of Chandragupta II) to an Aryasangha in the Gupta year 93 ( 412-3 A. D.); (4) Siri Chāntamūla I, an Iksvāku king of Sriparvata in Andhradeśa, had performed Agnistoma, Vājapeya and Aśvamedha sacrifices but the ladies of that family were almost all Buddhist and one of them erected a pillar in honour of the supreme Buddha (E. I. Vol. XX. p. 8 and Jayaswal's History of India' 50-350 A. D., p 175 ); (5) The Maitraka rulers of Valabhi (in Kathiawar) were all orthodox Hindus and almost all are described as great devotees of Maheśvara (Siya). The Journal of the University of Bombay vol III. (pp. 74-91 ) sets out five grants (four Buddhist and one to a brāhmaṇa) The first is issued by a feudatory Gārulaka Mahārāja Varāhadāsa in Valabhi year 230 (= 549 A.D.) and the others by the Valabhi kings themselves. The four Buddhist records mako grants to Yakṣaśūra-vibāra and Pūrnabhatta-vihāra (both monasteries for nuns) of lands and villages for providing garments, food, beds, seats and medicines to the nuns and for providing for incense, flowers, sandalwood &c. for the worsbip of Buddha images; (6) A king of Orissa, named Subhākara dova, who was son of a Buddhist king and who styles himself paramasaugata, made a grant of two villages in the latter half of the 8th century to a hundred brāhmaṇas belonging to various gotras (E. I. vol. 15 at pp. 3-5 Neulpur grant); (7) Vigrahapāla, king of Bengal, who belonged to the Buddhist Pāla dynasty, granted in the 12th year of his reign a village to a Sāmavedi brāhmaṇa after taking a bath in the Ganges on a lunar eclipse in honour of Buddha (Bhagavantam Buddhabbattārakam uddiśya) by the Amgacchi grant (E. I Vol. XV. p. 293 at pp. 295–298, about 1000 A. D.); (8) The successor of king Vigrabapāla (iii) by name Mahipāla granted a village in honour of Buddha after a bath in the Ganges in Visuva-sankranti to a brahmana (E. I. Vol. XIV. p. 324); vide also I. A, vol. 21 pp. 253–258 for a grant of Devapāladeva, a Buddhist king of Bengal, about the end of the 9th century, recording a grant of a village to a learned brāhmana. (9) In the Kalacuri stone Inscription from Kasia (E, I. vol. XVIII p. 128) the first invoca tion in prose is to Rudra and then to Buddha, the first two 

1014 

History of Dharmajāstra (Soc. V, Ch. XXV 

Verses are in praise of Saṅkara, 3rd in praise of Tara (a Buddhist deity) and the 4th and 5th verses praise Buddha (who is styled Munindra); (10) Kumāradevi, 4th queen of Govindacandra (1114_1154 A D.), a Gābadavala king of Kanauj and an orthodox Hindu, built a vihāra in which she placed an image of Dharma-cakra Jina i. e, Buddha (vide E. 1. Vol. IX p. 319 at p. 324); (11) Govindacandra himself made a gift of six villagos to a Buddhist learned ascetic (Śakyarakṣita by name) who hailed from Utkala (Orissa ) and to his pupil for the benefit of the Sangha at Jatayana Mabāvibāra (vide the Sahet-Mahet plate of Govindacandra dated sainvat 1186, i. e. 1128-29 A. D. recorded in E. I. vol. XI p. 20 at p. 24). (12) The Madanapur plate of the Buddhist king Sricandra 1647 of East Bengal recorda that the king made a grant of land to a brāhmaṇa named Sukradeva 'in honour of Buddha-bhattāraka' after having bathed on the Agastitstiyā day. (13) The Dambal (inscription of the times of Cālukya Tribhuvanamalla alias Vikramiditya (in saka 1017 i. e. 1095–96 A. D.) begins with an invocation to Buddha and records certain grants to two vibāras, one of Buddha built by certain Settis of Dharmāpura or Dharmavoļal (i. e, Dambal in Dharwar District) and the other of Tārādevi by & Sotti of Lokkigundi (or modern Lakkundi). (14) In E. I. vol. XVI p. 48 at p. 51 (Inscription of Lakṣmeśvara in 1147 A. D.) a general is styled as the restorer of the four sects viz. Saiva, Vaigpaya, Bauddha and Jaida (catuḥ-samaya-samuddharanam). (15) A stone inscription from Srāvasti (modern Sahet-Mahet) of (Vikrama) samyat 1276 (1219-20 A.D.) records that a certain person Vidyadhara of the Vastavya family established & content for Buddhist ascetica at the town where the inscription was put up (I, A. Vol. 17 p. 61). (16) The Kumbhakonam Inscription of Sovappa Nayaka of Tanjore (of 1580 A. D.) records the gift of some land in the brāhmaṇa village (agrahāra) of Tirumaliarājapuram to an individual attached to a temple of Buddha at Tiruvilandura, 1648 

1647. There is divergence of views about the date of Sricandra. Vide Dr. R. C. Majmudar's ' History of Bengal', vol. I p. 196 (where the beginning of 11th century A. D. bas been accepted by some scholars as tbe date of Sricandra ). 

1648. The last two examples indicate tbat, though Jayacandra of Kadauj was defeated and Kanauj was taken by the Mahomedans la 1193 A. D., Buddhism had oot become totally extinct in North India in the first quarter of the 13th century A. D. and that some remnants of Buddhism azisted la South India up to the 16th century A. D. 

General tolerance for all faiths in India 

2015 

The above examples show that in all parts of India in the North as well as in the South, the general rule among kings and their officers was tolerance and care for all faiths. If there was rarely some persecution it was by an individual king or officer or the like. On the other hand, though Asoka, ag an inheritor of the Indian royal tradition of showing honour and respect to all faiths of the subjects irrespective of his own religious views, breathes & striking spirit of tolerance in his 7th and 12th Rock ediots, one cannot help & suspicion that in the later part of his life he seems to gloat over the fact that the gods worshipped as divinities in Jambudyipa had been rendered false and he proudly proclaims that this result is 'not the effect of my greatness but of my zoal'. 

Edict he himos 

thousands of 

and one desbad reduced the 

It should be noted that even Asoka's ahimsā was at first not thorough-going but qualified. In his first Rock Edict he himself states that in his royal kitohen thousands of animals were killed, but that he had reduced the slaughter to two peacocks a day and one deer (that too rarely) and that even the three animals would not be killed in future (vide C. II. vol. I pp 1-2). Whether this last promise was really carried out is not clear. Besides, Asoka appears to have carried his solicitude for the protection of all life too far and used against buman beings his absolute power like a dictator. In the 4th Delhi Topra Pillar edict (O. I. I., vol. I p. 124) he mentions that his revenue settlement officers called Lajūkas had to deal with many hundred thousands of men and were given the discretion to award punishments including the death sentence and that a respite of three days was allowed in which the relatives of the man condemned to death could persuade the lajūkas to grant reprieves. In the fifth Delhi-Topra pillar edict (ibid. pp 125-128), after 26 years of his being anointed he declared that 23 kinds of birds and other animals (such as parrots, mainas, ruddy and wild geese, doves, certain kinds of fish, tortoises) were not to be killed at all, that owes and sows that were with young or were in milk or the young of these that were less than six months old were also not to be killed; he also forbade the sale of fish on certain Hull Moon days and the days previous to them and following them, the oastration of bulls, rams, horses on 8th, 14th and 15th days of a month and the branding of horses and bulls on Puṣya and Punarvasu and on oāturmāsis. These sweeping regulations must have caused great bardships to poor people and must have assumed the form of rigid coercion more or less, particularly 

1016 



(Seo, V, Oh. XXV 

when all discretion was left to the lajūkas. Later in life Aboka appears to have tried to undermine the worship of Hindu Gods. In a Rupnath Rook Inscription 1649 published by Bühler in I. A. vol. VI pp. 154-156 it was stated that he had been an upāsaka (lay worshipper of Buddha) for certain years but that he was not zealous, that for a year or more (he had become zealous), that during that (last interval) those gods that were held to be true gods in Jambudvipa (i, e. India) had been made (to be regarded as) false and that was the reward of his zoal. This could be construed as saying that when he became a zealous Buddhist he tried to dissuade people from the 

1649. The important words in the Rock edict at Brabmagiri, Rūpa Dātb and six other places are quoted here (there are sligbt variations and some omissions in almost all of them bere and there); I follow the reading in the Rūpanath text given by Prof. Jules Bloch in · Les Inscriptions d' Asoka' (Paris, 1950 pp. 145–148) Tari 198 TAHTE . Ha la eratuta (सानि। य सुमि पाकासके (उपासके?) नो चु बाढि पक्षनेते (पकन्ते) सातिलेके चु छवच्छरे यमुनि हक संघ (संघ) उपेते धादिच पकन्ते • या इमाय कालाय जम्बुदिपस्सि अमिस्सा देवा हुनु ते दानि मिस्सा कटा पक्कामस्स हि एस फले. नोच एसा महत्तता पाप्पोत्तवे · सुबकेम ñ temaata are tagg for at stad. (the rest is omitted). The Erragedi copy of the edict readsgiven fra AFHEAT a atha ATTA, Two others from near by regious read इमिना चु कालेन अमिस्सा समाना सनिस्सा a u Paraen. There are some gaps and mistakes in these and it is got clear what is meant. Probably the sentence in these latter may be rendered 'Daring that time men that were true or, if we take amissa as equal to amiśra that were not mixed with gods') became false (or, became mixed with gods'). The words from HF onwards mean this is the result of zeal; it cannot be attained by greatness ( by one occapylag a merely bigb position); even for a small person it is possible to reach heaven by zeal.' Mr. Ramchandra Dikshitar ia Prof. Rangaswami Aiyaagar Presentation volume pp. 25-30 argues that Asoka was a Hindu as be refers to 'Svarga'. This is not correct, since the edict itself recites that Asoka had been a lay follower of Buddha for more than 21 years before the date of the edict and that for more than a year before it be approached the community of monks aod became a zealous Boddhist (or probably a monk ). Even early Pali works speak of Gods from heaven coming to pay respect to Buddba. So the mere mention of svarga means little, Asoka does aot appear to bave been trained in the sacred Pali books if any existed. He hardly ever mentions nirvāṇa, never mentions (aadamental tenets of early Buddhism (in all his numerous edicts) like the Four Noble Truths or the Noble Eight-fold Path or Pratitya-samatpāda. He was probably attracted by Buddha's teachings on moral endeavour and subscribed to them and disliked Bacrifices. He appears to bave bolieved in gods and desired that the people should strive for heaven (vide 6th Rock edict at Giroar ' pret IT47' and similar words in the 10th Rock edict). This is all that can be said positively. 

Asoka', coercive measures 

1017 

worship of gods and probably resorted to coercive measuros in that direction. This very inscription is edited at O. I. I., Vol. I. pp. 166 by Dr. Hultzsch and the translation of the important sentence is changed and is given as 'And those gods who during that time had been unmingled with men in Jambudvipa have now been made (by me) mingled with them; for this is the fruit of zeal'. This new translation cannot be understood as it stands and on p. 168 (note 3) Hultzsch admits that this sentence is enigmatical and tries to show that it refers to religious shows at which effigies of gods were shown in order to convey to the subjects that they would be able to reach the abodes of gods by the zealous practice of Buddha's Dhamma. This interpretation is extremely far-fetched and does not fit into the context. How can the more showing of exhibi tions and their effect on people be regarded as the reward of zeal? Besides, in the very first rock edict he forbids assemblies or festival meetings (O. I. I. vol. I p. 1'na ca samājo kattavyo) except such as were regarded good by Asoka and asserts that the king sees great evil in festival meetings. Asoka probably followed what Āp. Dh. S. L 11. 32. 19 provides for Vodic house holders 'sabhāḥ samājāmāca' (varjayet), sabhā meaning 'gambling hall'. The author is not satisfied with the translation of Hultzsch, particularly when Bühler and Sonart (pp. 168 note) agreed as to the meaning of the important sentence about 

gods. 1650 

About Emperor Harsa also Yuan Chwang narrates that he caused the use of animal food to cease throughout the five Indies and he prohibited the taking of life under severe penalties (vide Watters' work cited above p. 344). This also must have boon felt by large populations as coercive and bordering on persecution. It is remarkable that Harṣa felt no qualms in roconciling his zeal for bird and animal life and keeping vast armies on a war footing for conquest. 

1650. Hultzsch himself in JRAS for 1910 at p. 1310 translated 'those wbo at that time were (considered by me) the true gods of Jambudvipa are now considered false (by me)'. The Mysore texts of this edict insort 

men' after the word 'those'. The great difficulty is about the words 'amissā' and missā katā'. They may respectively stand for 'amise' (oot false) or 'amisra' (not mixed) and mysā krta' (made false) or midrā kṣtā (made mixed). There is no word for considered'. A straightforward translation of 'amiskā devā busu' would be that were the true (not false) gods' and of 'missā katā' would be 'were made false'. 

H, D. 188 

1018 

History of Dharnasāstra (Sec. V, Ch. XXV 

Buddhist king went at Bodh Coved the building of the great 

A few more striking examples of tolerance of other faiths and spirit of accommodation may be cited here. The great Hindu emperor Samudragupta allowed the building of a splendid three-storied convent at Bodh Gaya at the request of the Buddhist king Meghavarna of Ceylon about 360 A. D. Vide 

Early History of India' by V. A. Smith (4th ed. of 1924 pp. 303-304), where the historian further points out that when Yuan Obwang visited Bodh Gaya, that convent was a magni ficent establishment occupied by a thousand monks. One Muhammad Ufi relates an anecdote. Though Mahomed of Gazni plundered Kathiawad and Gujarat several times and desecrated temples, the Hindus inade a distinction between such invading and destructive marauders and peaceful Muslime residing in Gujarat for trade. Some Hindus at Cambay, being incited by Bome Parsis, destroyed a mosque and killed some Muslims. Ono Muslim that escaped approached the king Siddharāja with & petition. The king in disguise inquired into the matter, punished the offenders, gave to the Moslems one lakh of Balotras to rebuild the mosque and presented to the Khatib four articles of dress which were preserved in the mosque. Ufi declares that he never heard a story comparable to this. Vide Elliotts' History of India, Vol. II pp. 162-163. The Somanath-Pattan Inscription (in I. A. Vol. XI p. 241) is & most remarkable document. A Muslim ship-owner from Hormuz acquired a piece of land in the sacred town of Somanath-pattan, built a mosque, a house 'and shops thereon. The purpose of the grant was to confirm the purchase and to provide for the application of the income from the shops for particular Moslem religious festivals to be cele brated by the Shia sailors of Somanath and to provide that the surplus left, if any, was to be made over to the sacred towns of Mecca and Medina. It is dated in four eras, first in Rasul Mahammad sancat i. e. Hijra year 662, then Vikrama samint 1320 (1264 A. D.), Valabhi year 945 and Simha samyat 151 (i.e. probably of Calukya Siddharāja Jayasimha ). Syrian Christians were given special privileges by generous Hindu rulers in South India. 

The above examples will indicate what tolerance was practised by Indian kings and people even in the mediaeval period when Moslem invaders were ruthlessly attacking India. The reader should visualise to himself what the fate of a Hindu would have been, if he had the audacity to build a temple in Christian or Moslem countries or tried to collect materials forIntolerance of moslem kings 

1019 

describing the Christian or Muslim religion and ways of life in the 13th century A. D. like Alboruni, who was able to collect, without molestation, from Hindu Pandits and people vast material in the 11th century A. D. 

offered stion of the to a brabia. p. 187); 

How intolerant most Moslem kings were need not be dwelt upon at length. A few typical examples may be cited from the Cambridge History of India, vol. III. Firuz Shah Tughlak burnt a brāhmaṇa who tried to propagate his religion (ibid. p. 187); Sikander Lodi did the same (ibid. p. 246) to a brahmana and was guilty of wholesale destruction of Hindu temples; Sultan Sikandar of Kashmir offered his subjects the choice between Islam and exile (ibid p. 280); Hussein Shah of Bengal sent an army to destroy Navadvipa and converted many brāhmaṇas forcibly. Jehangir says in his ‘Memoirs (translated by A. Rogers and edited by H. Beveridge, 1909 pp. 72–73) that he killed Guru Arjun for his religious activities. Vide History of Aurangzeb' by Jadunath Sarkar vol. III. chap. XXX. pp. 265-279 for firmans to demolish temples such as those of Somanātha, Mathurā, Viśvanātha in Benares, Ujjain and Appendix V. It is not necessary to go into great details about the terrible persecution of the Jews in Europe and the horrible deeds of the Inquisition in Europe and particularly in Spain and Portugal. For the persecution and expulsion of the Jews in Europe one may read 'A short History of the Jewish people' by Cecil Roth (MacMillan and Co. 1936 ) chapters XX-XXI. References to Beveral works have been given above on p. 933 note 1494 about the Inquisition. A few instances of the intolerance and barbarities of that body may be cited. The Inquisition staged what are called acts of faith or 'autos-da-fé'. In the presence of thousands of people severe punishment would be inflicted on harmless individuals whose adherence to the Holy Catholio faith was suspected. Those that professed penitence were stripped of their property and condemned to imprisonment, deportation or the galley. The minority who refused to confess to their crime of herosy or gloried in their views would be burnt at once. Kings and nobles graced such spectacles by their presence and such spectacles were arranged at the marriagos of high persons or on the birth of a son to the reigning monarch. During the three centuries when the Inquisition was active, it is found that the it condemned about 375000 people, of whom at least one-tonth were burnt; vide Ceoil Roth's A short History of the Jewish people' (1936) p. 312. Henry O. Lea in 'Superstition and 

1020 

History of Dharmaśāstra (Seo. V, Ch. XXV 

force' (1878) pp. 426-427 remarks The whole system of the Inquisition was such as to render resort to torture inevitable. Its proocedings were secret; the prisoner was carefully kept in ignorance of the exact charges against him and of the evidence on which they were based. He was presumed to be guilty and his judges bont all their energies to force him to confess. To accomplish this no meads were too base or too cruel'. 

It would be instructive to read what the state of Hindus was under Portuguese rule in Goa, where the infamous Inquisi tion was established in 1560 A. D. and continued its intolerant and inhuman work for about 250 years more. Those interested may consult 'A India Portuguesa', vol. II. published by the Portuguese Government in 1923, particularly the paper by Antonio de Noronha, a former judge of the High Court of Goa, on 'Os Indus de Goa' pp. 211–355. A brief passage from a paper on Historical essay on the Konkani Language' by J. H. de Cunha Ripara, who was General Secretary to the Portuguese Governor General in India from 1855 to 1870 A. D., is very illuminating. It runs (original in Portuguese) we shall now endeavour to investigate the causes, which under the Portuguese regime, were either favourable or contrary to the culture of the Konkani language. In the first ardour of conquest temples were demolished, all the emblems of the Hindu cult were destroyed and books written in the vernacular tongue, containing or suspected of containing idolatrous precepts and doctrines, were burnt. There was even the desire to exterminate all that part of the population which could not be quickly converted; this was the desire not only during that period, but there was also at least one person who, after a lapse of two centuries, advised the Government, with magisterial gravity, to make use of such a policy.' The writer further notes that the long distance of Goa from Portugal, the invincible resistance offered by & numerous population amongst whom the principal castes had reached a very high degree of civilization, obliged the conquerors to abstain from opon violence and to prefer indirect, though not gentle, means to achieve the same end. 16500, 

Buddha's renunciation of his princely position, of his young wife, child and home, to become & wandering ascetic for dis covering the path of humanity's deliverance from sorrow and 

1650a. Quoted from p. 161 of 'The Pripting Press in India' by Prof. A. K. Priolkar (Bombay, 1958). 

Noble grandeur of Buddha's life 

1021 

suffering, his subsequent mortification of the body for years, his retirement into solitude for meditation, his struggle with Māra and final victory, his confidence that he had discovered the path of deliverance, his constant travels from city to city and village to village for about forty-five years for proaching the great truths he had discovered, his crusade against the slaughter of innocent and dumb animals in sacri fices, his passing away full of years and in peace and content ment- this panorama of Buddha's life had a noble grandeur and irresistible human appeal Edwin Arnold in his preface (p. XIII) to his poem "Light of Asia' (1884) pays & very eloquent tribute to Buddha's teaching in the following words this vener able religion which has in it the eternity of an universal hope, the immortality of a boundless love, an indestructible element of faith in the final good and the proudest assertion ever made of buman freedom'. The torch lighted by Buddha was kept burning brightly by a succession of able and worthy disciples till Buddhism reached its peak about the 6th century A. D. A reaction had already begun by that time. Substantial changes in the old Buddhist faith had been made, the ideals had changed (as noted above). From being a faith without a clear accep tance of God, many sects arose that had become thoroughly theistic and Buddha himself came to be worshipped as if he were God and the sects were gripped by the strange doctrines and evil practices of Vajrayāna Tantrik sects; and Buddhism became a medley of conflicting dogmas and was riven with dis sensions and internecine rupture. Discussions as to doctrines arose immediately on the passing away of Buddha, when the first council was held at Rājagļha, a second one being held about one hundred years later at Vesāli and a third one at Pataliputra under Asoka. In all four councils appear to bave been held to secure 'sangiti' (standardized scriptural recital) according to traditions, but no Pali book can be traced back to a time before the council held in the time of Asoka (about 250 B. C.). These discussions and subsequent schisms very much undermined Buddhism. This is mentioned as the first of the four main causes of the decline and disappearance of Buddhism from India by N. J. O'Connor. 

III. From about the end of the 7th century A. D. India was divided into several independent but small and warring States. Buddhism could not secure the favour and patronage of powerful and zealous monarchs and emperors like Asoka, Kaniṣka and 

1022 

History of Dharma sāstra 18eo. V, Ch. XXV 

Harsa. Royal patronage on a large scale having ceased from the end of the 7th century A. D., except under the Pala kings of Bengal, Buddhism began to wane. 

IV. Many of the ablest and most vigorous exponents of Buddhist thought and faith left India for propagating their faith in other landa. Dr. Radhakrishnan in India and China' names 24 eminent Indian scholars who went to China for propagating Buddha's teachings from the 3rd Century A. D. to 973 A. D. (p. 27 ) and also mentions a fou Chinese scholars who came to India for visiting the sacred places of Buddhism and for making a study of Buddhism on the spot ( ibid. pp. 27-28 ). 

V. The observance of the high moral ideals inculcated by Gotama Buddha must have been found irksome by at least a great many of his followers, and particularly after his personal example ceased to exist. In the Mabāparinibbānasutta (S. B. E. vol. XI. p. 127 ) we are told that Subhadda, a barber who had been received in the Order in his old age, addressed the brethren, that deeply mourned and lamented on Buddha's nirvana, am follows: "Weep not, neither lament. We are well rid of the Great Samana. We used to be annoyed by being told this becomes you, this beseems you not!. But now we shall be able to do whatever we like; and what we do not like that we shall not have to do." Ordinary people could not be fed for long on mere repetition of the sermon on suffering being the lot of man, on monasticism, aversion to speculation and on promises of nirvāṇa which was hardly ever well defined. By nirvana Buddha probably meant extinction of egoism and desires, a state of bliss beyond understanding and not a complete annihilation or extinction. But this last was the sense in which many under stood it. Buddha had an aversion to speculation and parti cularly to issues that were irrelevant to his purely moral approach and purpose. Several questions of a metaphysical or speculative character such as whether the world is permanent or not, whether it is finite or not, whether the soul ia the same as the body or other than the body, wbether the Tathāgata continues after death or not were left unanswered by Buddha (vide Majjhima Nikāya diecourse 63, Trenckner's ed. vol. I.), Mons staries of Buddhist monks and puns became in course of time centres of idleness, pleasures and immorality, and of debesed practices like those of Vajrayāna Tantricism. A well-known scholar like Rahula Saṅkstyāyada, bimself a Buddhist bhikṣu, in a paper on 'Vajrayāna and the 84 Siddhas' contributed to the 

Debased state of Buddhist monasteries 

1023 

Journal Asiatique vol. 225 ( 1934 ) pp. 209–230 was constrained to say "The monasteries and templos were gorged with riches due to the pious offerings made by the multitudes. The life of the monk became more comfortable than that of the layman. The discipline weakened and many unfit persons entered the community. 1651 The easy life associated with the culture of a sensual art under the cover of cultured paintings, meditation, gods and goddesses must have inclined the minds towards sensuality. Already from the Kathāvatthu 165la (XXIII, 1) we know that the Andhaka School was disposed to permit Maithuna (copulation) for a special object; it was introduced in the mystic cult. Coming to the south, the practice of mantras, psychical practices, and a certain indulgence in the pleasures of sense were united; the Vajrayāna was complete ". 

VI. Smrtis like those of Gautama (IX. 47, 68, 73), Manu (IV. 176, 206, X. 63 ), Yājñavalkya (I. 156, III. 312-313), while asking the people to honour the Vedas and learned brāhmaṇas laid great emphasis 1652 on Ahirsā, truthfulness, charity, self 

1651. A paper of Dr. A. S, Altekar in the Pro, of the 17th All India Oriental Conference at Abmedabad, 1953 (pp. 243–246) on Sramanera-Tikā (about 11th century A. D.) on the Ācārasāra (laying down rules for Buddhist sovices) enumerates admonitions (some of the striking ones be ing set out on p. 245) that lead to the conclusion that the monks had a fairly large aumber among them that brought Buddhism into disrepate. In the Questions of king Milinda'S. B, E, vol. 35 pp. 49-50, to the question wby people joined the sangha, Nāgasena gives the significant answer that some joined the sangha for the reason that sorrow may perish and no further sorrow may arise, 'the complete passing away without clioging to the world is our beighest aim': "some have left the world in terror at the tyraday of kings; some have joined to be safe from being robbed, some barassed by debts and some perhaps to gain a livelihood. 

1651 a. Tati 

Buret Agar Tetianant a 13 THENTI apuercy XXIII, 1. 1652. अहिंसा सत्यमस्तेयं शौचमिन्द्रियनिग्रहः । एतं सामासिक धर्म चातुर्वण्ये नवीन्मनुः । मनु x.63; अहिंसा सत्यमस्तेयं शौचमिन्द्रियनिग्रहः । दानं दमो दया क्षान्तिः Freimeti trattare il 91. I. 22; furet TALOTT: 1 TT Haag warraren ira. मनायासो मङ्गलमकार्पण्यमस्पृहति । यस्यैते चत्वारिंशसंस्कारा न चाटावात्मगुणा न स ब्रह्मणः Frigo F r eefar a VIII 23-25. The ARYSTO (52. 8-10) mentions these very eight as 'atmaguṇas' after referring to the Veda and acira 'वेदोऽखिलो धर्ममूलमाचारश्चैव तद्विदाम् । अटावात्मगुणास्तस्मिन्प्रधानत्वेन संस्थिताः।" Foto 52. 7-8; the Atrismrti ( verses 34-41) mentions almost all these eight and defines them and Haradattā on Gautama quotes eight verses defining those eight gunas. Ta verse 131 is ' 

p ana na ut que faltai अधनो मुखमेसानो पेच सो न लभते सुखम् ॥' 

1024 



[sec. V, Ch. XXV 

restraint, sexual purity and other virtues for persons of all the four varnas, just as Buddha and early Buddhist works did for his followers. The sentiment in Manu V. 45 and the Visṇu-dharma sūtra 51. 68'he, who kills harmless animals ( like deer) merely for the sake of his own pleasure, never increases nor prospers in happiness, whether living or after death,' finds & parallel in Dhammapada 131. Even the Rgveda solemnly says ( X, 85.1) 'the earth is supported by Truth, the sky is supported by the Sun'. The Mundaka Up. exhorts Truth alons is victorious, not falsehood '(III. 1.6). 

VII. The strong faith and the alertness of brāhmanas wlo welded into a coherent whole the Veda, the philosophy of the Upaniṣads, Yogic practices of a middle path as in Gita VI. 15-17, the doctrine of salvation by faith and bbakti for all preached in the Gitā gradually held an irresistible appeal. 

VILI. In re-orienting their religious outlook and practices to stem the tide of Buddhism and make Hinduism popular, the brāhmaṇas and other leaders of Hindu society of the centuries before and after the Christian era had to make compromises of a far-reaching character; the old Vedic gods (like Indra and Varuṇa) recoded into the background though not totally forgotten, most of the Vedic sacrifices had to be given up, deities like Dovi, Ganosa and the Mātrs had to be brought to the front, Paurāpika mantras came to be used along with Vedic ones as the mantras even in sraddha (e. g.' dātāro nobbivardhaptām' &c, wbich occurs in Manu III, 259, Yaj, I. 246, Matsya 16. 49-50, Padma, Srstikhanda 9. 117, Kūrma II, 22. 60 and other works ). Even an early writer like Varāhamibira (first half of 6th century A.D.) in describing the Pusya-snāna for the king provides ordinary mantras (Bṭ. S. 47.55-70 ) to be recited by the purohita along with mantras in the Atharvaveda, Rudra (Tai. S. IV. 5. 1-11), the Kūṣmāṇda mantras (Vaj. S. XX. 14-16 and others, Br. S. 47.71 ) and winds up the whole procedure with a well-known Paurāṇika verse. 1653 Even Aparārka (pp. 14-15 ) had to say that in Devapūjā the procedure to be followed is that in the Narasimhapurana (probably something like the one in chap. 2. of the Narasimha Purāpa ) and in the matter of 'pratistha' ( establishment of images) also Paurāṇika procedure was to be adopted Besides, emphasis was laid on abimsā, charity (dāna), 

of the Narguināma (probably some to be followed is the 

1653. यान्तु देवगणाः सर्वे पूजामावाय पार्थिवात् । सिद्धि दत्वा तु विपुला पुनरा. WITH \#TERT. 47. 49. 

Changes introduced by Purānas 

1025 

pilgrimages and vrata, and it was said that the latter two were inore efficacious than even Vedic sacrifices. These changes seriously reduced the appeal of Buddhism. The purāṇas con tained stories of goda and avatāras that viedlin their appeal to the common man with the Buddhist Jataka tales. The Kādambari of Bāṇa ( first half of 7th century A. D.) states that the people of Ujjayini were fond of the Mahābhārata, Purāṇas and Rāmāyaṇa (Mahābhārata-Purāṇa-Rāmāyaṇā-nurāgiṇā &c). This is put down as the last of the four causes of the decline of Buddhism by O'Connor. 

IX. From about the 7th century A. D. Buddha began to be recognised by Hindus as an avatāra of Viṣnu and by the 10th century Buddha came to be so recognised throughout India by almost all Hindus. 

X. Moslem fanaticism and invasions of India delivered the coup de grace (final blow) to Buddhism about and after 1200 A. D. by ruining famous universities like those of Nalanda and Vikramasila and the monks were mercilessly killed in large numbers. Those who escaped the carnage fled to Tibet and Nepal. H. M. Elliott's History of India (as told by its own. historians) vol. II p. 306 contains a passage from Tabakat-i Nasiri about Bakhtiyar Khilji that states that Bakhtiyar led his army to Behar and ravaged it, that great plunder fell in his hands, that most of the inhabitants of the place were brāhmaṇas with shaven heads, that they were put to death, that large numbers of books were found and it was discovered that the whole fort and city was a place of study (madrasa). The des cription indioates that brāhmana with shaven heads were Buddhist monks. 

It should not be supposed that Buddhist bhikkhus renounc ed wealth altogether: Vide I. A. vol. VII pp. 254–256 (Insorip tions 2 and 9 at Kuda) where bhikṣus and bhikṣuṇis are donors and Cunningam's * Bhilsa Topos' p. 235–236 where there are many bhikṣus and some bhikṣunis among donors. The great appeal of the original Buddhism to common men lay in its spirit of self-abnegation, discipline, service and sacrifice. 

When Moslem invaders exterminated the monks the laity became bewildered and were either converted to Islam or became slowly absorbed among Hindus. It has been already stated that Buddha himself was against the admission of women into the Sangha but at the persistent requests of his favourite pupil 

8. D. 129 

hors of books were to place of study 

haven heads we 

1026 

History of Dharmaśāstra (Sec. V, Ch. XXV 

Ananda he yielded and prophesied that his pure Dharma, which otherwise would bave flourished for a thousand years, would not last so long but only for 500 years. Vide Cullavagga' in SBE. vol. XX p. 325. 

The Pātimokkha for monks contains 217 articles which were to be recited twice a month in an assembly of at least four monks and confessions of breaches of the rules had to be made. If one reads the Cullavagga (SBE. XX. pp 330-340), one may understand how the gatherings of legions of monks and nung in immense monasteries led in some cases to sapping the ordinary observances of decency and morality. At first the Pātimokkha could be recited to nuns by monks and the nuns could confess their lapses to monks but this had to be changed later and it was laid down that only bhikkhuṇis could do these things for them. P. 333 of the same shows how nuns quarrelled among themselves and came to blows and p. 335 narrates how some monks throw dirty water on nuns and how they uncovered their bodies and thighs before nuns. 

The author has cited the above as the main causes of the disappearance of Buddhism following what most have written. Different writers attach importance to a few of them according to their individual leanings. While prepared to concede that the causes noted above went a long way in bringing about the downfall of Buddhism in India, he feels that the principal cause was that large sections of the Indian population came to realize that the persistent teaching of the world being a place of suffer. ing, of giving up all desires and of monasticism, which were preached by the writers on Buddhism to all and sundry, was too much for ordinary men to attempt and that the Hindu ideal of an ordered scheme of life into four āśramas,1654 with peculiar duties and rights, particularly the importance attached to the gshasthāśrama showed to vast populations that family life properly regulated and disciplined was capable of realizing the highest that man was capable of and that too much insistence on the giving up of all desires (including desire for life ) sapped the very stability and continuance of human society and 

1654. In the Philosophy of the Upanisbads' by Denssed tr. by A. S. Geden ( 1906), the distioguished author after adverting to the pecaliar sights and obligations of the foor life-stages (Rsramas ) remarks the entire history of mankind does not produce much that approaches in grandeur to this thought' (p. 367). 

Great praise of householder stage 

1027 

gradually led on to the loss of physical and mental virility to idleness, base morala and race suicide, Manu III. 77-78, VI 89-90, Vas. Dh. S. VIII. 14-17, Visnu Dh. 8. 59, 29, Daksa II. 57-60 and many other sages and writers praise the stage of householder as the highest. 1655 The Mahābhārata (Santi 270. 6–11) and the Rāmāyana, Ayodhyā 108, 2) and the Purānas also sing the same tune; vide H. of Dh. vol. II, pp. 425– 426 and 540-541. 

Not only Dharmaśāstras but also great poets like Kālidāsa emphasized the supreme importance of the householder's stage to society. In the Raghuvamsa 1656 (V. 10) king Raghu says to a learned brābmana student it is now time for you to pass on to the second stage of life that is capable of being useful to (mon of) other asramas'. In the Sākuntala also Kālidāga harps on the same idea. 

When Buddha came to be worshipped by Buddhists 28 God, whon Buddhists gave up the original characteristic doctrine of the attainment of the peace and bliss of nirvana in this very life through the eradication of selfish desires by following the Noble Eightfold Path, when Buddhists adopted the doctrines of bhakti and the ideal they set up was the evolution of bodhi. sattvas through aeons by good deeds, the line of demarcation between Buddhism and popular Hinduism became very thin and was gradually obliterated. Buddhism disappeared from India because of these deviations from the original doctrine and because the brāhmaṇas made Hinduism very comprehensive by finding a place for purely monistic idealism, for the worship of several gods, for the performance of vedic or other religious rites (i. e. Karmamārga) as a preparation for higher spiritual life. The ultimate victory of Hinduism shows the strength and comprehensiveness of its religion and philosophy as against the onesidedness of Buddhism in its various pbases and its silence on matters of great moment to the inquiring human mind." 8,- 1655. Vide Forcaricaragranit, pranga RI da WHEH TEH AZ III. 78; Hleverage coup 26. 3- 

6m UERETA que जगत् । पुष्णाति तेन लोकांश्च स जयत्यभिवाञ्छितान ॥ पितरो मुतयो देद्य भूतानि मलावा। कमिकीटपतङ्गाश्च पयासि पशवोऽसुराः। गृहस्थमुपजीवन्ति वतस्तुति प्रयान्ति च । इ त्य 

Partint targeta harrema netaito (chap. 29. 3-6 

· of B. I. edition) 

___1656. अपि प्रसोन महर्षिणा त्वं सम्यग्विनीयानुमता गुहाय । कालो झर्य संक्रमित Anitt fatter TAAT STÁ AN Tart V. 10; Srna erfatgocate Th Freitas 

FTITATS I, 

1028 

History of Dharmatāstra (Seo. V, C. XXV 

The Puranas and Dharmaśāstras put so muoh emphasis on ahimsa that millions of people in India became and are even now strict vegetarians not only among brāhmaṇas, but also among vaiśyas and sūdras, while it appears that Buddhists all over the world are not strict vegetarians at all. To-day very few of the ideal virtues that Buddhism set before even laymen are a matter of endeavour for most Buddhists in all lands. In spite of Buddha's crusade against animal sacrifices and Asoka's drastic measures to eliminate the killing and cruelty to birds and beasts, it is found that some Vedic sacrifices (including animal sacrifices ) continued to be performed by Indian kings and common people during the centuries before and after the Christian ora. A few examples are cited here : (1) Sepāpati Puṣyamitra (about 150 B. C.) performed two Aśramedhas (E. I. vol XX pp 54-58, Harivamsa III. 2. 35 ff 1657 ( which latter speaks of Senāni Kāśyapa-dvija as performer of Aśvamedha in Kali age ) and Kālidāsa's Malavikāgnimitra ( Act V) where he is spoken of as engaged in Rajasūya sacrifice; (2) Khāravela, king of Kalinga and a Jain, performed in the 6th year of his roign a Rājasūya (E. I. XX. p. 79); (3) Bhavanāga of the Bhāraśiva lineage (about 200 A. D.) glorified as the performer of ten Aśvamedhas in Vākātaka plates (Chammak plate of Vākāṭaka Pravarasena II. in Gupta Inscriptions No. 55 pp. 236 237, 1658 and in Poona plates of Prabhāvatigupta, the chief queen of Vākāṭaka Rudrasena II in E. I vol XV. p. 39 ); (4) Vākātaka emperor Pravarasena I. (about 250 A. D.) is described as the daughter's son of Bhavanaga and as the per former of four Aśvamedhas ( in E. I. vol. XV. p. 39 ); (5) The great Gupta emperor Samudragupta (about 325–370 A. D.) is described in some Gupta Inscriptions 48 one who restored the Aśvamedha sacrifice that had long been in abeyance (vide Bilgad Stone inscription in Gupta Inscriptions No. 10 at p. 42 and the Bihar Stone pillar Inscription of Skandagupta, ibid, 

1657. The reference from great is as follows: argit fara enfrentarai: काश्यपी द्विजः । अश्वमेधं कलियुगे पुनः प्रत्याहरिष्यति तयुगे तत्कुलीन राजसूयमपि काम्। MERG@ Trio ALETA ten: 1 *facepal 2. 40-41. Here it is said that a सेनापति of the काश्यपगोत्र will perform an अश्वमेध In कलियुग and a scion of his family will perform राजस्य, 

1658. About Bhavadāga it is said 'sini garantera सपरितुष्ट-समुत्पादित-राजवंशानां पराक्रमाधिनतभागीरथ्यमलजलमूर्षामिषिकाना शाम मेधावमृथस्नातानां भारशिवाना महाराजश्रीभवनाग-दौहित्रस्प"वाकाटकाना महाराजमीर: Happy &c.'1 Gopta Toscriptions No. 55 pp. 236-237.Examples of performance of Vedic animal sacrifices 

1029 

No. 1% at p. 51 ); (6) The Pallava King Sivaskanda-varman (about 300-350 A.D.) is praised as the performer of Agnistoma, Vajapeya and Asyamedha ( E. I vol. I. p. % at p. 5); (7) The Pallava king Simhavarman is spoken of as the performer of several Aśvamedhas (Pikira grant in E, I, vol. VIII. p. 159 at p. 162 ); (8) Calukya king Pulakasi I( about 570 A, D.) per formed Aśvamodha ( Aihole Inscription of saka 536 in E. I. vol. VI. p. 1 ); (9) Calukya king Pulakesi II performed Asyamedba (Aihole Ing, of saka 536 in E. I. vol. VI. p. 1 and Talamanchi plates of Vikramaditya I. in E. I. vol. IX. p. 98 in A. D. 660 ); (10) the Viṣnukuṇdin Madhava-varmā (a relative of the Vākāṭaka family ) is recorded (in E. I. vol IV. p. 196 ) as having performed eleven Aývamedhas, one thousand Agni-stomas, Paundarika, 1659 Puruṣamedha, Vājapeya, ṣodasin and Rājasūya ( about the 7th or 8th century AD.). For other instances of Advamedhas performed by kings, vide H. of Dh, vol. II. pp. 1238–39. 

It may be noted that even learned brāhmaṇas sometimes performed eleborate Vedic sacrifices. For example, the fifth in ascent from Bhavabhūti performed a Vājapeya at Padmapura in Dakṣiṇāpatha. In the Vājapeya, seventeen was a chara cteristio number and seventeen animals were to be sacrificed therein. Vide for description of Vājapoya, H. of Dh. vol II. pp. 1206-1212. As Bhavabhūti flourished in the first half of the 8th century A. D., the fifth in ascent from him who performed Vajapeya must have flourished about a hundred years before him i. e. in the first half of the 7th century A. D. 

In these days it has become a fashion to praise Buddha and his doctrines to the skies and to disparage Hinduism by making unfair comparisons between the original doctrines of Buddha with the present practices and shortcomings of Hindu society. The present author has to enter a strong protest against this tendonoy. If a fair comparison is to be made it should be made between the later phases of Buddhism and the present practices of professed Buddhists on the one hand and modern phases and practices of Hinduism on the other. The Upaniṣads had a nobler philosophy than that of Gautama the Buddha, the latter merely based his doctrines on the philosophy of the Upaniṣads. If Hinduism decayed in course of time and exhi 

1659. It is possible that this statement about the performance of so many solemn vedic sacrifices is boastful and exaggerated, 

1030 



(Sec. V, Oh, XXV 

bited bad tendencies, the same or worse was the oase with later Buddhism which gave up the noble but human Buddha, made him a god, worshipped his images and ran wild with such hideous practices as those of Vajrayāna. As a counterblast to what modern oncomiasts often say about Buddhism the present author will quote a strongly-worded (but not unjust ) passage from Swami Vivekananda's lecture on "The sages of India" (Complete Works, volume III. p. 248-268, 7th ed. of 1953 publi shed at Māyāvati, Almora) "The earlier Buddhists in their rage against the killing of animals had denounced the sacrifices of the Vedas; and these sacrifices used to be held in every house ... ... These sacrifices were obliterated and in their place came gorgeous temples, gorgeous ceremonies and gorgeous priests and all that you see in India in modern times. I smile when I read books written by some modern people who ought to know better that the Buddha was the destroyer of Brahmanical idolatry. Little do they know that Buddhisin created brahmanism and idolatry in India. ... Thus in spite of the proaching of mercy to animals, in spite of the sublime ethical religion, in spite of the hair-splitting discussions about the existence or non-existence of a permanent soul, the whole building of Buddhism tumbled down piecemeal; and the ruin was simply hideous. I have neither the time nor the inclination to describe to you the hideousness that came in the wake of Buddhism. The most hideous ceremonies, the most horrible, the most obscene books that human hands ever wrote or the human brain over conceived, the most bestial forms that ever passed under the nanie of religion have all been the creation of degraded Buddhism" (pp. 264–265 ). 