+++
title = "077 एको ऽलुब्धस्"

+++
The evidence of a single person having been declared to be inadmissible,
the present verse lavs down an exception in favour of one who is free
from covetousness. So that if a man is known to be truthful, he is
certainly admissible as witness. But women are never admissible,—be they
one or many,—‘*even though pure*’—possessed of high qualifications; and
the reason for this is that ‘*the understanding of women is not
steady*’; fickle-mindedness is the very nature of women; while other
qualifications are acquired, and as such liable to lapses through
carelessness, idleness and so forth; so that their inherent fickleness
remains as a constant factor. Just as in the case of a dyspeptic,—even
though a certain amount of appetite may have been regained by the use of
butter and other things, yet even the least neglect on their part,
brings on the inherent Dyspepsia again. Consequently, on account of this
uncertainty, there can be no confidence in women, even though they be
highly qualified.

As for the declaration (in 70) that ‘in the event of no witnesses being
available, women may be made witnesses,’—that refers to cases where they
can be immediately questioned, and there is no possibility of their mind
being tampered with by any person. When however there has been an
interval of time, it is quite possible that they may be won over by the
party whoso case is weak and who is in fear of losing it. So that in
such cases their evidence is not admissible at all.

‘*Other men tainted with defects*;—even persons other than women,—and
men,—who are ‘*tainted*’—beset—with such defects as love, hatred and so
forth; *i.e*., men in whom those defects abound to a every large extent.

Though Love, Hatred and the rest, as being forbidden by the scriptures,
have, already been declared by name to be sources of suspicion and
dishonesty,—yet they are referred to here again, for the purpose of
including those that have not been so mentioned by name, and all writers
sanction the mentioning of the general and special aspects of the same
tiling.

Some people have adopted the ‘*a*’ before ‘*lubdha*’ and construed the
verse to mean that ‘even though free from covetousness, a single man
cannot be a witness,—how much less then one who is covetous,’—and hence
as permitting the evidence of *two* men.

Though the form ‘*śucyaḥ*’ is impossible, in view of Pāṇini 4.1.44, yet
some people justify it as being in accordance with the *Vārtika* on
4.1.45—(77)


