+++
title = "168 यो ऽनधीत्य"

+++
Some persons (as noted above) have explained the term ‘*entire*’ (of the
preceding verse) to include the Subsidiary Sciences; and according to
this view, it might be thought that the study of these might be taken up
in any order one might choose, without any restriction; hence the
present verse proceeds to lay down a definite order,—*viz*., the Veda
should be learnt first, then the Subsidiary Sciences. Others have
however taken the term ‘entire’ to preclude the possibility of men being
content with the learning of parts only of the Veda; and according to
these, the ‘learning of the Veda’ naturally comes up first, after the
completion of the ‘*Traividya*’ observances (of the *Upanayana*) so that
(what the present verse means is that) until the Veda has been learnt,
the learning. of the Sciences cannot be permitted.

‘*The twice-born man*’—Brāhmaṇa—‘*who, not having learnt the Veda,
labours*’;—*devotes attention*—‘*over* *other subjects*,’ *i.e*.,—the
Subsidiary Sciences, or treatises on Reasonings—‘*falls, even while
living, to the state of the Śūdra*’—‘*soon*’—quickly,—‘*along with his
descendants*’;—*i.e*., accompanied by his son, grandson and other
descendants.

‘*Labour*’—is great effort. Since the absolute prohibition of labour
over the study of the Sciences cannot be intended, all that is meant is
that these latter are to be studied during the time available, after the
Veda has been learnt.

The mention of ‘*falling to the state of the Śūdra*’ is meant to express
excessive deprecation.

The use of the term ‘*twice-born*’ implies that the restriction herein
laid down regarding the rules of study applies to only one who has gone
through the Initiatory Rites; and before Initiation, the study of such
Subsidiary Sciences as of Phonetics, Grammar, and the rest as are not
interspersed with quotations from the Veda, is not prohibited.

“The study of the Subsidiary Sciences is implied by the Injunction of
Vedic Study; and this injunction is acted up to by the boy prompted by
his Teacher; so that before Initiation, there being no Teacher, how can
there be a study of the Subsidiary Sciences?”

There is no force in this objection. According to the assertion—‘the
child who is taught by his father they call efficient’—the Initiatory
sanctification might be performed by the father; who, before the
Initiation, will teach him the Science of Grammar and the rest.—(168)


